               AZTEC C
              OWNER'S
               MANUAL
                 MANX
             SOFTWARE
               SYSTEMS
C
CC
CCo
CCom
CComp
C Compi
C Compil
C Compile
C Compiler
        Aztec C II User Manua1

               Release 1.05

                  9/9/83




Copyright (C) 1981 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.
Copyright (C) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.

           All Rights Reserved

                Worldwide



             Distributed by:
          Manx Software Systems
              P. O. Box 55
         Shrewsbury, N. J. 07701
              201-780-4004
Aztec C II




                                 CONTENTS

                                                          SECTION

Installation                                                  I

Overview                                                      II

Aztec C II Compiler                                           III

r.1ANX AS Relocating Assembler                                IV

MANX LN Linker                                                V

Library Functions                                             VI

Microsoft Compatibility                                       VII

Error Codes and Error processing                              VIII

LIBUTIL Library utility                                       IX

I/O Redirection and Buffered I/O                              X

MANX Overlay Linker    ...................................... XI
Data Formats                                                  XII

Assembly Language Support •...••••••••••.••••••••••••••.••    XIII

producing ROMable Code                                        XIV

Floating Point Support                                        XV

SID/ZSID Support                                              XVI

Unbuffered I/O Support                                        XVII

User Submitted Software                                       XVIII


Sample       Program                                 Appendix      A

programming for Efficiency                             Appendix B




Copyright (C) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.
                            INTRODUCTION

Welcome to the growing number of Aztec C II users. This manual
will describe the use of the various components of the Aztec C II
system.


1.1 Origin of HC·

Dennis Ritchie originally designed "C" for the UNIX project at
Bell Telephone Laboratories. All of the UNIX operating system,
its utilities, and application programs are written in "C".

1.2 Standard Reference Manual for HC"

The standard reference for the "C" language is:

    Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie, The C
    programming-Language. Prentice-Hall Inc., 1978, (Englewood
    Cliffs, N. J.)

The above text besides providing the standard definition and
reference for the "C" language is an excellent tutorial. Aztec C
II can be conveniently used in conjunction with the K & R text
for learning the IIC   Il
                         language. Aztec C II is a complete
implementation of the K & R standard IIC II . The K & R book is an
essential part of the Aztec C II documentation. Most questions
regarding the "C" language and many questions on the run.time
library package will only be answered in the K & R text.

1.3 Basic Components of the Aztec C II System

The Aztec C II system consists of a comprehensive set of tools
for producing software using the "C" programming language. The
system includes a full feature "C" compiler, a relocating
assembler, a linkage editor, an object library maintenance
utility,  plus an extensive set of run time library routines.
Also included are interfaces to MICROSOFT's MACRO-80 assembler
(M80) and Digital Research's SID/ZSID debugging system.

1.4 Brief System Overview

The Aztec C II compiler is a complete implementation of UNIX
version 7 IIC II , with the exception of the bit field datatype. The
compiler produces relocatable 8080 source code. The compiler can
optionally produce Z80 instructions for some optimization on Z80
systems. It does not, however, generate Z80 mnemonics. The source
output of the Aztec C II compiler can be assembled by, the
MICROSOFT MACRO-80 (M80) assembler.

The MANX AS relocating assembler is an 8080 mnemonic assembler
that accepts a subset of the MICROSOFT MACRO-80 assembler syntax.
The assembler is used to assemble the output of the compiler and
for writing assembly language subroutines to be combined with "C"
routines.


                                 1
The relocatable object files produced-by the assembler are
combined with other relocatable files and library routines by the
MANX LN linkage editor. The linkage editor will scan through one
or more run time libraries and incorporate any routines that are
referenced by the linked modules.

The Aztec C II system also includes LIBUTIL, an object library
utility. LIBUTIL allows a user to change the contents of the
standard MANX supplied run time library or to create private run
time library.

The run time library is included in the standard package in
source form, in MANX library format, and in MICROSOFT library
format.

1.5 System Requirements

Aztec C II runs on any CP/M or HEATH HDOS system with at least
56K of memory and one disk drive. There are no special terminal
requirements for Aztec C II other than the ability to produce
upper and lower case and the special characters:

         ( ) [ J < > -+="" 1? \      I   A   % *   &:   i   I   II   I




1.6 Cross Compilers

A UNIX cross compiler is available for Aztec C II.     The cross
compiler produces 8080 or Z80 code that can be downloaded to the
target machine. Cross compilers are also available from PC-DOS,
MS-DOS, and CP/M-86. Cross compilers are in development, for VAX
VMS, RSX and RTII on the PDP 11, and XENIX.

01.7 portability

Code written for Aztec C II can be compiled with Aztec C J[, the
Apple DOS 3.3 lie" compiler, Computer Innovations C86 compiler
for the IBM PC, CP / M- 86, and MS DO S , and UN I X v 7       MANX      II e l l .

.. c .. compilers for 8088/8086 and 68000 systems will be available
in early 1983.




                                 2
                        SOFTWARE LICENSE

Aztec C II, MANX AS, and MANX LN are licensed software products.
Manx Software Systems reserves all distribution rights to these
products. Use of these products is prohibited without a valid
license agreement. The license agreement is provided with each
package. Before using any of these products the license agreement
must be signed and mailed to:

                      Manx Software Systems
                          P. O. Box 55
                     Shrewsbury, N. J 07701

The license agreement limits use of these products to one machine
and explicitly limits duplication of the products to no more than
two copies whose sole purpose will be for backup. Any uses of
these products that might lead to the creation of or distribution
of unauthorized copies of these products will be a breach of the
licensing agreement and Manx Software Systems will excercise its
right to reclaim the original and any and all copies derived in
whole or in part from first or later generations and to pursue
any appropriate legal actions.

Software that is developed with Aztec C II, MANX AS, or MANX LN
can be run on machines that are not licensed for these products
as long as no part of the Aztec C II software, libraries,
supporting files, or documentation is distributed with or
required by the software. In the latter case a licensed copy of
the appropriate Aztec C software is required for each machine
utilizing the software. There is no licensing required for
executable modules that include library routines. The only
restriction is that neither the source, the libraries themselves,
or the relocatable      Object of the library routines can be
distributed.

                            COPYRIGH'l'

Copyright (C) 1981, 1982 by Manx Software Systems. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
transmitted, transcribed, stored in a retrieval system, or
translated into any language or computer language, in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, magnetic, optical,
chemical, manual or otherwise, without prior written permission
of Manx Software Systems, Box 55, Shrewsbury, N. J. 07701.




                                3
                           DISCLAIMER

Manx Software Systems makes no representations or warranties with
respect to the contents hereof and specifica11y disc1aims any
imp1ied warranties of merchantabi1ity or fitness for any
particu1ar purpose. Manx Software Systems reserves the right to
revise this pub1ication and to make changes from time to time in
the content hereof without ob1igation of Manx Software Systems
to notify any person of such revision or changes.

                           TRADEMARKS

Aztec C II, MANX AS, and MANX LN are trademarks of Manx Software
Systems. Credit is given to Digital Research of California for
its trademarks: CP/M, MP/M, and MAC. Credit is given to Microsoft
of Washington for its'trademarks: MACRO-80, and LINK-80. Any
references to M80 and L80 also refer to the appropriate
trademarked software packages. UNIX is a trademark of Bell
Laboratories.




                                4
Aztec C II




                          INSTALLATION

Aztec e II is distributed on one or more diskettes. Two compilers
and two libraries are supplied. The ell compiler and LIBC.LIB
library will run on 80aO systems and produce 8080 code. The CZII
and LIBCZaO.LIB library require a' zao processor for compilation
and execution. The Z80 version is more efficient than the aoao
version in the use of memory and CPU resources. The zao version
does not, however, generate Z80 mnemonics, nor is it fully
optimized for the zao. Any other libraries supplied on the
distribution disk are a080. ·To produce code that will run on both
8080 and zao systems the a080 compiler and libraries must be
used.
Instructions for generating a        wor king disk
                                      II              from the
                                                      ll


distribution disk(s) will be found in the release document
supplied with the disks. Because some releases have significant
changes in the form and contents of the distribution disk, it is
very important to read the release document thoroughly to insure
proper creation of a working disk.

After creating a working' disk, it is advisable to compile,
assemble, 'link edit, and execute the sample program, EXMPL.C. To
produce an executable absolute file, follow the procedure
described in the OVERVIEW section of this manual. To execute the
program once created, type in EXMPL. The program will display the'
following:
                    enter your name

When you enter your name followed by a carriage return,           the
program will display a simple greeting.
Your Aztec CII compiler, assembler,        and link editor are now
installed and ready to go.




Copyright (e) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.      Page 1.1
AZTEC C II                                                         OVERVIEW


                                      OVERVIEW

Figure 1 depicts the basic steps for producing a binary image of
a "C" program. It also indicates the path for producing and using
run time subroutine libraries. The process depicted is fairly
basic.


        1.
             +---------------------+
             1       EDITOR         1
             +---------------------+
                             1

                  /         "C"        \
              1         source file        1
                  \                    /

        2.
             +---------------------+
             1 Aztec C II compiler 1
             +---------------------+
                       1

                  /        h ASM "     \
              1         source file        1
                  \                    /

        3.
             +---------------------+
             1 MANX AS Assembler    1
             +---------------------+
                             1



              1
                  /         "0"
                        Object file
                                       \ 1---> +---------------------+
                                               1 LIBUTIL librarian    1
                  \                    /       +---------------------+
                                                               1



        4.
             +---------------------+     / subroutine \ 1
             1 MANX LN Link Editor 1<-- I library
             +---------------------+
                             1
                                         \            /
                  /        "COM"     \
              1       executable file 1
                  \                    /

        5.
             +-~-------------------+
             1 program execution
                                                        +------------------+
                                               1<---->1 Digital Research 1
             1                                 1       1 SID debugger    1
             +---------------------+                    +------------------+
         Figure 1. Developing "c" programs with Aztec C II




In developing a           large   system,        many    "c" programs would be

Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.                     Page 11.1
AZTEC C II                                                   OVERVIEW


compiled and assembled into object £iles. A private library
might be built to contain frequently used subroutines. Object
modules would be combined with library routines by the linkage
editor to produce an executable binary image.

Figure 2 depicts the basic steps for producing a binary image of
a .. c .. program using Aztec C II and the MICROSOFT MACRO-80 (M80)
assembler, LINK-80 linker·(L80), and LIB-80 (LIB) librarian. The
basic procedure is the same.


        1. 1
             +---------------------+
                     EDITOR         1
             +---------------------+
                       1

                     /         .. c..   \
                 1        source file       1
                     \                  /
             +---------------------+
        2. 1 Aztec C II compiler 1
             +---------------------+
                       1

                     /       "ASM"      \
                 1        source file       1       at this step .ASM" must be
                                                                 II


                     \                  /           renamed ".MAC"


        3.
             +---------------------+
             1 MACRO-80 assembler    1              the .8080 option must be used
             +---------------------+
                       1


                 1
                     /       "REL"
                          object file
                                        \ 1---> +---------------------+
                                                1 LIB-80 librarian     1
                     \                  /       +---------------------+
                                                           I

        4.
             +---------------------+     / subroutine \ 1
             1 LINK-SO Link Editor 1<-- 1 library
             +---------------------+
                       1
                                         \            /
                     /        "COM"     \
                 1       executable file 1
                     \                  /

        5.
             +---------------------+
             1 program execution
                                           +------------------+
                                    1<---->1 Digital Research 1
             1                                  1     1   SID debugger     1
             +---------------------+                  +------------------+
                            Figure 2.
  Developing "C" programs with Aztec C II and the MICROSOFT System



Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.                Page 11.2
AZTEC C II                                         OVERVIEW


In the fol'lowing text several references are made to "COM" files.
CP/M absolute modules usually have ".COM" sufffixed to the
filename and so "COM" refers to an executable module. For HEATH
HDOS the corresponding type of file has II.ABS" appended to the
file name.

Source programs for Aztec C II are created with a text editor. A
text editor is not supplied with the Aztec CII,    but there are
numerous excellent editors available for CP/M and HDOS.
There are three steps to follow to create a "COM" (CP/M) or "ABS"
(HDOS) file from a "C" source file. The first step is the compile
step that translates "C" source into assembler mnemonic's. The
second step is an assembly of the assembler source file generated
by the "C" compiler. Either the MANX AS assembler or the
MICROSOFT MACRO-80 assembler may be used. The third step is the
link edit step. If the MANX AS assembler was used in the first
two steps, then the MANX LN linker must be used to combine the
object files and library object routines to produce an executable
file. If the MICROSOFT assembler was used then the MICROSOFT
linker must be used. The Manx and MICROSOFT object files are not
compatible.


Assume that a "C"   source program, EXMPL.C, exists. Then the
following procedure would produce a EXMPL.COM (CP/M) or EXMPL.ABS
(HDOS) file.
step 1:

CII    exmpl.c                               compile

step 2:

AS    exmpl.asm                             assemble

step 3:

LN    exmpl.o     libc.lib                  link


In the above example, the output file from the compile step,
"exmpl.asm", is specified as the input to the assembly step. The
output file from the assembler, "exmpl.o", is specified as the
input file to the linkage editor. The output of the linkage
editor is named "exmpl.com" (CP/M) or "exmpl.abs" (HDOS).

Any number of object files can be linked together. Common
subroutines can be automatically included through a library
search.' The "_L" option specifies the library name. "libc.lib" is
the name of a run time library supplied with the compiler
package. It must be included in every link. Additional libraries
can be supplied with additional "_L" specifications. The linker
can tell the difference between a library and a simple object file
allowing the "_L" to be omitted. A library is created by t~e

Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.     Page 11.3
AZ"l'EC C II                                     OVERVIEW


L1BUTIL program.

In order to use Aztec e II with the Microsoft assembler and
linker, the II-Mil option ~ust be specified on the compile step. To
create a library for use with the Microsoft link editor, the lie II
library source supplied with this package must be compiled with
the II-Mil option, assembled with the Microsoft assembler, and
placed in a Microsoft library. Library assembler source must be
assembled and placed in the same library (see section VI, Library
Functions).
The ell command and IIlibc.lib library are 8080 compatible. The
                               ll


CZII command and IIlibcz80.lib" library are Z80 equivalents and
can be used on Z8D systems in place of ell and IIlibc.lib" for
some improvement in memory utilization and execution speed.




Copyright 1982 (e) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page 11.4
AZTEC C II                                        OVERVIEW




                             COMPILER

The Aztec e II compiler is implemented according to the language
description supplied by Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie,
in The e programming Language. The user should refer to that
document for a description and definition of the "e" language.
This document will detail areas where the Aztec e II compiler
"differs from the description in that book.

The reader who is not familiar with "e" and does not have a copy
of the Kernighan and Ritchie book is strongly advised to acquire
one. The book provides an excellant tutorial for learning and
using C. The program examples given in the book, can be entered,
compiled with Aztec C II and executed to reinforce the
instruction given in the text.
The library routines defined in standard e that are supported by
Aztec "e" are identical in syntax to the standard. The library
routines that are supported are defined in the library section of
this manual. In order to allow access to native operating system
functions, Aztec ell includes some extended library routines
that do not exist in the standard e. These also are described in
the library section. The system dependent functions should be
avoided in favor of the standard functions in order to reduce
future conversion problems.




Aztec C II requires the following statement:
                          #include "libc.h"

If none of the special open options are used (see Library
Function section), then the following can be used instead of
libc.h:
                          #include "stdio.h"

Aztec C II is invoked by the command:
                             ell name.c

It is recommended that the filename end in ".C", but it is not
necessary. "e"  source statements found in the "name.c" file are
translated to assembler source statements and written to a file
named "name.asm". If some other name is wanted then the "-0"
option is used (0 is a letter). For example

                        ell -0 temp.asm exmpl.c

will process the lie II statements in exmpl.c and write the translated


eopyright 1981 (e) by    Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page 111.1
Aztec C II                                                 COMPILER

assembler source to temp.asm.
If the Microsoft assembler is to be used, the "_Mil option is
required.

By default Aztec e II expects that pointer references to members
within a structure are limited to the structure associated with
the pointer. To support programs written for other compilers
where this is not the case, the "-8" option is provided. If "-8"
is specified as a compile time option and a pointer reference is
to a structure member name that is not defined in the structure
associated with the pointer,      then all previously defined
structures will be searched until the specified member is found.
The search will begin with the structure most recently defined
and search backwards from there.

Compiler Options

     "-Til option       will copy the lie" source statements as
                        comments in the assembly language output
                        file. Each lie" statement is followed by the
                        assembly language code generates from the
                        statement.

There are four options for ·changing default internal table sizes:

     -E   option        specifies the size of the expression work
                        table.

     -x   option        specifies the size of the macro (#define)
                        work table. The -Y option specifies the
                        maximum number of outstanding cases allowed
                        in a switch statement.
     -y      option     specifies the maximum number of outstanding
                        cases allowed in a switch statement.

     -z      option     specifies   the   size of the string literal
                        table.

 The default value for -E is 120 entries. Each entry uses 14
 bytes. Each operand and operator in an expression requires one
.entry in the expression table. Each function and each comma
 within an argument list is an operator. There are some other
 rules for determining the number of entries that an expression
 will require. Since they are not straightforward and are subject
 to change, they will not be defined here. The best advice is that
 if a compile terminates because of an expression table overflow
 (error· 36), recompile with a larger value for -E.

The following expression uses 15 entries in the expression table:
                   a = b + function ( a + 7, b, d)   * x
The following will reserve space for             300 entries    in the

Copyright 1981 (e) by      Manx Software Systems, Inc.     Page 111.2
Aztec C II                                            COMPILER


expression table:

                          cii -E300 prog.c

There must be no space between the -E and the entry size.

The macro table size defaults to 2000 bytes. Each "#define" us'es
four bytes plus the total number of bytes in the two strings. The
following macro uses 9 bytes of :table space:

                          #define v OXIF

The following will reserve 4000 bytes for the macro table:

                         cii -X4000 prog.c
The macro table needs to be expanded if an error 59 (macro table
exhausted) is encountered.

The default size for the case table is 200 entries, with each
entry using 4 bytes.
The following will use 4 (not 5) entries in the case table:

              switch (a) {
              case 0:
                  a+=l;
                  break;
              case 1:
                  switch (x) {
                  case I a' :
                      functl (a);
                      break;
                  case Ib':
                      funct2 (b);
                      break;
                    }
                  a = 5;
              case 3:
                  funct2(a);
                  break;
              }


The following allows for 300 outstanding case statements:

                          cii -Y300 prog.c

The size of the case table needs to be increased if an error 76
(case table exhausted) is encountered.

The size of the string table defaults to 2000. Each string
literal occupies a number of bytes equal to the size of the
string. The size of a string is equal to the number of characters
in the string plus one (for the null terminator).


Copyright 1981 (C) by   Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page 111.3
Aztec C II                                             COMPILER



The following will reserve 3000 bytes for the string table:

                           cii -Z3000 prog.c

The size of the string table needs to be increased if an error
2 (string space exhausted) is encountered.

The name of the .. c.. source file must always be the last argument
in the command line.




Copyright 1981 (C) by   Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page 111.4
Aztec C II                                                         ASSEMBLER




                                         ASSEMBLER

The MANX AS assembler accepts a subset of the Microsoft MACRO-BO
assembler language. The Manx AS assembler does not support
macroes or Z80 mnemonics.

The MANX AS assembler is a relocating assembler and is invoked
by the command line:

                                     AS name.asm

The relocatable object file produced by the assembly will be
named name.o where name is the same name as the name on the .asm
file. An alternate object filename can be supplied by specifiying
-0 filename (0 is a letter). The object file will be written to
the filename following "-0". The filename does not have to end
with ".0", it is, however, the recommended format. The file
"name.asm" is the assembly language source file. The filename
does not have to end in ".asm".

To produce an assembly listing,  specify "_L". The assembler is a
one pass assembler so forward address references will not appear
on the listing.

The following defines the syntax for the AS assembler:

                                        STATEMENTS

Source files for the MANX AS assembler consist of statements of
the form:

             [label[:]] [opcode] [argument] [jcomment]

The brackets   II [   ••• ]   II   indicate an optional element.


                                          LABELS
A label consists of .1 to 8 alphanumerics followed by an optional
colon. A label must start in column one. If a statement is not
labeled then column one must be left blank. A label must start
with an alphabetic. An alphabetic is defined to be any letter or
one of the special characters:

                                          @$
An alphanumeric is an alphabetic, or a digit from a to 9.

A label followed by "##" is declared external.

                                        EXPRESSIONS
Expressions are evaluated from left to right with no precedence
as to operator or parentheses. Operators are:


Copyright 1981 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.              Page IV.l
Aztec C II                                                    ASSEMBLER




                 + - * / AND OR XOR NOT SHL SHR MOD

                               CONSTANTS

The default base for numeric constants is decimal. A number
suffixed by a IIBII is binary, ie. lOOlOllOB. A number suffixed by
a "0" is decimal, ie. 7650. A number suffixed by an 0 or Q is
octal, eg. 1260 or l26Q. A number or alphabetic A-F suffixed by
an "H" is hexadecimal, ie.     OFEEH.

A character constant is of the form 'character ' :     'A'.

                         ASSEMBLER DIRECTIVES

The MANX AS assembler supports the following pseudo operations:

 COMMON /<block name>/           sets the location counter to the
                                 selected common block.

 CSEG                            select code segment

 DB <exp>                        define byte constant

 DSEG                            select data segment

 OW                              define word constant (2 bytes)

 END                             end of assembler source statements

 FUNC    label                    if label is not defined then
                                 it is declared external

 NLIST                           turn off listing

 LIST                            turn on listing

 MACLIB/XTEXT filename           include statements from another
                                 file

 PUBLIC/EXT/EXTRN label          declares label to be external
                                 or entry




Copyright 1981 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.        Page IV.2
Aztec   C II                                                        LIIlKER


                                       LINKER

Overview

A.   SUMMARY

The aztec link editor will:

               a.   combine object files produced by the Aztec II
                    assembler
               b.   select routines from object libraries
               c.   produce an executable .COM (CP/M) or ABS (HDOS)
                    file

The following are the options available with this linker:

               1.   -I'       specifies an input library of subroutines
               2.   -0        specifies the output file
               3.   -r        generates a symbol table for overlays
               4.   -t        creates a symbol table file
               5.   -b        sets the base address
               6.   -c        sets the base address for the code portion
                              of the output
               7.   -d        sets the base address for the data area
               8.   -f        allows command arguments to be taken from
                              the file


The MANX LN link editor will combine object files produced by the
MANX AS assembler, select routines from object libraries, and
produce an executable "COM" (CP/M) or "ABS" (HDOS) file.

Supplied with Aztec C II is the libc.lib Object library. In most
cases this library must be specified. To link a simple single
module routine, the following command will suffice:

                         LN   name.o   libc.lib

The operand     "name.o" is the name of the object file. The
executable file created by LN will be named name.COM (CP/M) or
name.ABS (HDOS). The -0 option followed by a filename can be used'
to create an alternative name for the LN output file.

'Several modules can be linked together as                 in the' following
 example:

           LN -0 name.com modl.o mod2.0 mod3.0           libc.lib

Also several libraries can be searched as in the following:

LN -0 name.com modl.o mod2.0            mylib.lib   lib. lib   libc.lib

Libraries are searched sequentially in order of specification. It
is expected that all external references will be forward. One way
to deal with the problem of routines that make external reference


Copyright 1981 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.              Page V.l
Aztec C II                                                      LINKER

to a routine already passed by the librarian is the following:
 LN -0 name.com modl.o mod2.0   mylib.l        mylib.l   libc.lib

The link editor will read the "mylib.l library twice. The second
                                          lt


time through it will resolve backward references encountered on
the first pass.

B. DETAILED LISTING OF LINKER OPTIONS

                           -T

to create a symbol table file for the ZSID debugging aid. The
symbol table file will have the same prefix name as the" .COM" or
".ABS" file with a suffix of ".SYM".


                           -B address

to specify a base address other than hex 100. The "base address"
is assumed to be in hex. A space is required between the Band
the hex address.

                           -C address

to specify a starting address for code portion of the output. The
default is the base address + 3. The first three bytes are
usually occupied by a jump instruction to system initialization
code. It is assumed that the code starting address is specified
as a hex number.

                           -D address

to specify a data address. Data is usually placed behind the end
of the code segment.

                           -F filename
to merge contents of IIfilename" with command line arguments. More
than one specification of -F can be supplied. There are several
advantageous uses for this command. The most obvious is to supply
the names of modules that are commonly linked together. All
records in the file are read. There is no need to squeeze
everything into one record.




Copyright 1981 (c) by Manx Software Systems; Inc.          Page V.2
\ztec C II                                        LIBRARY FUNCTIONS




                       STANDARD LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



~.   SUMMARY


      1. Buffered File I/O            ( K & R chapter 7)


agetc         (stream)                  ASCII version of getc
aputc         (cstream)                 ASCII version of putc
fclose        (stream)                  closes a~ I/O stream
fgets         (buffer, max, stream)     reads text from stream to buffer
fopen         (name, how)               opens file name according to how
fprintf       (strm, format, argl ••• ) writes formatted print to stream
fputs         (cp, stream)              writes string cp to stream
fread         (buf,   SZ,  cnt,  strm}  reads cnt items from strm to buffer
fscanf        (fp, control, pI, p2, ••• } converts input string
fseek         (strm, pos, mode)         positions stream to pos
ftell          (strm)                   returns current file position
fwrite        (buf, sz, cnt, strm)      writes count items from buf to strm
getc          (stream)                  gets a character from file stream
getchar       ()                        read from standard input
gets          (buffer)                  reads a line from the console
getw          (stream)                  returns a word from stream
printf        (format, argl, arg2 ••• ) writes formatted data on console
putc          (c, stream)               writes character c into stream
putchar       (c)                       writes to standard output
puts          (cp)                      writes string cp onto console
putw          (c, stream)               writes a word c to stream
scanf         (control, pI, p2, ••• )   formats input from standard in
sscanf         (str, control, pI, p2, ••• } reverse of sprintf
ungetc        (c, stream)               pushes c back into stream


         2.   Unbuffered I/O       ( K & R chapter 8

close         (fd)                      closes file fd
creat         (name, mode)              creates a file
lseek         (fd, pos, mode)           positions file desc according to mode
open          (name, rwmode)            opens file according to read/write mode
posit         (fd, num)                 positions file fd to number record
read          (fd, buf, BUFSIZE)        reads from fd to buf BUFSIZE bytes
rename        (oldname, newname)        renames a disk file
unlink        (filename)                erases a disk file
write         (fd,buf, BUFSIZE)         writes from buffer to fd BUFSIZE bytes




Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.          Page VI.l
Aztec C II                                         LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



        3.   String Manipulation

atof          ( cp)                       converts ASCII to floating
atoi          (cp)                        converts ASCII to integer
atol          ( cp)                       converts ASCII to long
ftoa          (m, cp, prec, type)         converts floating point to ASCII
index         (cp, c)                     returns cp from beginning of string
rindex        (cp, c)                     returns cp from end of string
strcmp        (strl, str2)                compares strl with str2
strcpy        (dest, src)                 string copy routine
strlen        ( cp)                       returns 11~th of string
strncmp       (strl, str2, max)           compares'   1 to str2 at most max
strncpy       (dest, src, max)            string copy at most max characters

        4.   utility Routines

alloc         (size)                      allocates memory
blockmv       (dest, src, length)         moves length bytes from src to dest
clear         (area, length, value)       initializes area to value
exit          (n)                         stop program
format        (func, format, argptr)      formats data using routine function
isdigit       (c)                         checks for digits 0 •.• 9
islower       (c)                         checks for lower case
isupper       (c)                         checks for upper case
sprintf       (buff,   form, argl,arg2)   places string format data in buffer
to lower      (c)                         converts to lower case
toupper       (c)                         converts to upper case

        5.   Operating System Interface

bdos          (bc i de)                   calls bdos
bios          (n, bc, de)                 calls the n'th entry into BIOS
bioshl        (n, bc, de)                 calls the n'th entry into BIOS
CPM           (bc, de)                    calls bdos
exit          (n)                         returns to the operating system
fcbinit       (name, fcbptr)              initializes file control blocks
settop        (size)                      bumps top of program memory

        6.   Math and Scientific Routines

acos          (x)                         inverse cosine of x (arcos x)
asin          (x)                         inverse sine of x (arcsin x)
at an         (x)                         inverse tangent of (arctan x)
atan2         (x, y)                      arctangent of x divided by y
cos           (x)                         cosine of x
cosh          (x)                         hyperbolic cos'ine
cotan         ( x)                        cotangent of x
exp           (x)                         exponential function of x
log           (x)                         natural log of x
10g10         (x)                         logarithm basi of x
pow           (x, y)                      raise x to the y-th power
sin           (x)                         sine of x
sinh          (x)                         hyperbolic sine function
sqrt          (x)                         returns the square root of x


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.         Page VI.2
Aztec C II                                          LIBRARY FUNCTIONS

tan          (x)                           tangent of x
tanh         (x)                           hyperbolic tangent function



B. DETAILED LISTING OF LIBRARY FUNCTIONS
            Explanation of Format of Library Descriptions

The following is a sample library function description.   Each of
its parts is numbered and explained in the paragraphs below. All
the library functions found in this section of the manual follow
this format:


        l.fseek
                    2.int 3.fseek 4. (stream, pos, mode)
                    5.FILE *streami
                    6.int pos, mode


l.fseek
                    The word located in the left margin is the name of
                    the function to be described. The functions are
                    listed    in  alphabetical order    according   to
                    category.

2.int
                    This is a definition of the type of value
                    returned.  Here, it is an integer. (Other types
                    could be longs, characters, doubles, pointers,
                    etc) .

3.fseek
                   This again is the name of the function.

4. (stream, pos, mode)
                This is a prototype of the parameter list. In this
                example, IIstream is a pointer (*) to a structure
                                     li


                of type IIFILEII.   The parameters of IIpOS" and
                IImode" are integers.

5.FILE *stream This defines the stream parameter as type FILE.
                                      II       II

               All parameters must be defined as they are in the
               function definition.

6.int pos,mode
                   This defines defines pos and mode as integers.

NOTES:
             1.    FILE is defined in file libc.h or stdio.h.
             2.    When calling ANY library function or using
                   MACRO-80, libc.h MUST BE INCLUDED.




Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.          Page VI.3
Aztec C II                                       LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


Standard I/O functions

These functions provide a uniform I/O interface for all programs
written in Aztec C II regardless of the operating system being
used. They also provide a byte stream orientated view of a file
even under systems which do not support byte I/O. To use the
standard I/O package you should insert the statement:

                 #include "libc.h"

                 or

                 #include "stdio.h"

into your programs to define the FILE data type and miscellaneous
other things needed to use the functions.

1. Buffered File I/O         (K & R chapter 7)

agetc

         int agetc(stream)
         FILE *stream;

         This is an ASCII version of getc which recognizes an end
         of line sequence (CR LF on CPM) and returns it as a single
         newline character ('\n    l
                                    Also, an end of file sequence
                                       ).

         (control z on CPM) is recognized and returned as EOF. This
         routine provides a uniform way of reading ASCII data
         across several different systems.

aputc

         int aputc(c, stream)
         int c; FILE * stream;

         ASCII version of putc which operates in the same manner as
         putc. However, when a newline (I\n ' ) is put into the file,
         an end of line sequence is written to the file (CR LF on
         CPM) •

         Note: If a partial data block is written as the last block
         in a file, it is padded with an end of file sequence
         (control Z on CP/M) before being flushed.

fclose

         int fclose(stream)
         FILE *stream;

         The function "fclose" informs the system that the user's
         program has completed its buffered i/o operations on a
         device or file which it had previously opened (by calling
         the function fopen"). fclose releases the control blocks
                       II

         and buffers which it had allocated to the device or file,


copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.       Page VI.4
Aztec C II                                     LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


        thus allowing them to be used when other devices or files
        are opened for buffered i/o. Also, when a disk file is
        being closed, fclose writes the internally buffered
        information, if any, to the file.

        If the close operation is successful, fclose returns a
        non-negative integer as its value. If it isn't successful,
        "fclose" returns -1 as its value, and sets an error code
        in the global integer errno. If the close was successful,
        errno is not modified.

fgets

        char *fgets (buffer, max, stream)
        char *bufferi  int maxi
        FILE *stream

        The function IIfgets" reads characters from a device or
        file which has been previously opened for buffered i/o (by
        a call to II fopen") into the caller ' s buffer. The operation
        continues until either (1) a newline character (I\n ' ) is
        read, or (2) the maximum number of characters specified by
        the caller have been transferred. If the newline character
        is read, it will appear in the caller's buffer.

         If the read operation is successful, "fgets" returns as
         its value a pointer to the start of the caller's buffer.
         otherwise, it returns the pointer NULL and sets a code in
         the global integer errno. If it is successful, errno is
         not modified.

         The parameter "stream" identifies "the device or filei it
         contains the pointer which was returned by the function
         "fopen" when the device or file was opened for buffered
         i/o.

         The parameter "buffer" is a pointer to a character array
         into which IIfgets can put characters.
                          ll




         The parameter "max" is an integer specifying the maximum
         number of characters to be transferred.

fopen

        FILE *fopen(name,how)
        char *namei char *hOWi

        The function "fopen" prepares a device or disk file for
        subsequent buffered i/o operations; this is called
        "opening" the device or file.

        If the device or file is successfully opened, fopen returns
        as its value a pointer to a control block of type FILE.
        When the user's program issues subsequent buffered i/o
        calls to this device, the pointer to its control block must


copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.      Page VI.S
Aztec C II                                  LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


      be included in the list of parameters. In the descriptions
      of the other buffered i/o functions which require this
      pointer, the FILE pointer is called IIstreamll.

      If fopen can't open the device or file, it returns the
      pointer NULL and sets an error code in the global integer
      lIerrnoll. If the open was successful, errno isn't modified.

      The parameter "name ll is a pointer to a character array
      which contains the name of the device or file to be opened.
      The devices which can be opened have the following names:

               device name         device
               con:                system console
               1st: or prn:        line printer
               pun:                punch device
               rdr:                reader device

      The device name can be in upper or lower case.

      When a disk file is to be opened, the drive identifier in
      the name parameter is optional. If its included, the file
      is assumed to be on the specified drive: otherwise, its
      assume to be on the default drive.

      The "how ll parameter specifies how the user s program
                                                       l


      intends to access the device or file. The allowed values
      and their meanings are:

               "how" value    meaning
                   "r II      open for reading. The device or
                              file is opened. If a file is
                              opened, its current position is set
                              to the first character in the file.
                              If the device or file doesn't
                              exist, NULL is returned.
                   "W ll      Open for writing. If a file is
                              being opened, and if it already
                              exists, it is truncated to zero
                              length. If it's a file and the file
                              doesn't exist, it is created.
                   II all     Open for append. The calling
                              program is granted write-only
                              access to the device or file. For
                              disk files, if the file exists, the
                              its current position is set to the
                              character which follows the last
                              character in the file. Also, for
                              disk files, if the file doesn't
                              exist,   i t is created and its
                              current position is set to the
                              start of the file.



copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page VI.6
Aztec C II                                       LIBRARY FUNCTIONS

                      "r+"        Open for reading and writing. Same
                                  as "r" but the device or file may
                                  also be written to.
                      IIW+"       Open for reading and writing. Same
                                  as "w" but the, device or file may
                                  also be read.

                      "a+ "       Open for append and read. Same as
                                  "a" but the device or file may also
                                  be read.

fprintf

        fprintf(stream,format,argl,arg2, .•• )
        FILE *stream:
        char *format: •.•
          The function "fprintf" formats the caller's parameters as
          specified by the caller and writes the result to a device
          or disk file. Formatting is done as described in chapter
          7, entitled "Input and Output", of The e programming
          Language. Note: Long and floating point conversions are
          supported by Aztec ell, but not by Aztec e.

          The parameter "stream" identifies the device or file. It
          contains the pointer 'which "fopen" returned to the caller
          when the device or file was opened for buffered i/o.

          The parameter "format" specifies how the formating is to
          be done.

          The parameters "argl", etc, are the parameters which are
          to be formatted.


fputs

        int fputs(cp, stream)
        char *cp: FILE *stream:

          The function "fputs" writes a character string to a device
          or disk file. "fputs" uses the function "aputc" to write
          the string, so newline translation may occur.

          If the operation is successful, "fputs" returns zero as
          its value. Otherwise, it returns EOF.

          The parameter "stream" identifies the device or file. It
          contains the pointer which was returned by "fopen" to the
          caller when the device or file was opened for buffered
          i/o.

          The parameter "Cp" is a pointer to a character array
          containing the string to be written.


Copyright 1982 (e) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.       Page VI.7
Aztec C II                                        LIBRARY FUNCTIONS




fread

         int fread(buffer,size,count,stream)
         char *bufferj
         int size,countj
         FILE *streamj

         Reads count items of size bytes into buffer from stream.
         Returns the number of items actually read.

fscanf
         int fscanf(stream,control, argl, arg2,    ••• )
         FILE *streamj
         char *controlj
         Formats data according to control. Data is read from stream
         file. Formating is done as described in chapter 7,
         Input and Output, of The C programming Language.

fseek
        int fseek (fp,pos,mode)
        FILE *fp;
        long pOSj
        int mode;
        positions the stream according to pos and mode. Mode is
        interpreted as follows:
             0- seek from O. Pos is treated as an unsigned number
                and fp is positioned pos bytes from the beginning of
                the file.

             1- seek relative from the current position.

             2- seek relative from the end of the file.



fte11

         long ftell(stream)
         FILE stream;
         Returns the current byte position of stream from the
         beginning of the file.

£write
         int fwrite(buffer,size,count,stream)
         char *buffer;


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.          Page VI.8
Aztec C II                                     LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


       int size,count;
       FILE *stream;

       Wr i tes count items of size bytes from buffer into stream.
       Returns the number of items actually written.

getc

       int getc(stream)
       FILE *strearn;

       Returns the next character from stream. The unique value
       EOF is returned if an error is encountered or when reaching
       end of file. The character is not sign extended so that
       the unique value EOF (-1) is distinguishable from an Oxff
       byte in the file.

getchar                                              C MACRO

         int getchar ( )

         Returns the next character from standard input (stdin).

gets

       char *gets(buffer)
       char *buffer;

       Reads a line from the standard input. The returned value is
       buffer.   All of the usual line editing facilities are
       available if input is from the console. This is not the
       case with getchar. Note: the end o£ line sequence is not
       left in the buffer. This is different from fgets for
       compatibility reasons.

getw

         int getw(stream)
         FILE *streami

         Returns a word from stream. The least significant byte is
         read first, followed by the most significant byte. Returns
         EOF if errors or end of file occur. However, since EOF is a
         good integer value, errno should be checked to determine if
         an error has occurred.

printf

       printf(format,argl,arg2, ••• )
       char * format i

         Formats data according to format and writes the result to

         the console. Formating is done as described in chapter 7,
         Input and Output, of The ~ programming Language.


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.     Page VI.9
Aztec C II                                        LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



putc

          int putc(c,stream)
          int Ci FILE *streami

         Writes character c into stream at the current position.
         Returns c if all is okay and returns EOF if an error
         occurs.

putchar

         int putchar(c)
         int Ci

        Writes c to the standard output (stdout)


puts

        int puts(cp)
        char *CPi

        Writes string cp to the standard output (stdout).

putw

         int putw(c, stream)
         int Ci FILE *streami

        Writes a word, c, to stream. The least significant byte is
        written first, followed by the most significant byte.
        Returns c if all is okay and EOF if error occurs. However,
        since EOF is a good integer value, errno should be checked
        to determine if an error has occurred.

scanf

         int scanf(control, argl, arg2,   ... )
         char *controli

         Formats data according to control. Data is read from
         standard in. Formating is done as described in chapter 7,
         Input and Output, of The C programming Language.

ungetc

         int ungetc(c stream)
         int ci FILE *streamj

          Pushes c back onto stream so that the next call to getc
          will return c. Normally returns c, and returns EOF if c
          cannot be pushed back. Only one character of push back is
          guaranteed and EOF cannot be pushed back.



Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx software Systems, Inc.        Page VI.10
Aztec C II                                       LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



~   Unbuffered I/O

        Unbuffered I/O is described in chapter 8 of The C
        programming Language by Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M.
        Ritchie. the chapter is captioned liThe UNIX System
        Interface".


c10se

        close(fd)
        int fd;

        An open device or disk file is closed.

        The parameter "fd" specifies the device or file to be
        closed. It is the file descriptor which was returned to the
        caller by the open function when the device or file was
        opened.

        If the close operation is successful,    close returns as its
        value the value of the fd parameter.

        If the close operation fails, close returns -1 and sets a
        code in the global integer errno. If the close was
        successful, errno is not modified. The only symbolic value
        which close may set in errno is EBADF, meaning that the
        file descriptor parameter was invalid.


creat

        creat(name, pmode)
        char *name;
        int pmode;

        The function "creatll creates a file and opens it for write-
        only access. If the file already exists, it is truncated so
        that nothing is in it (this is done by erasing and then
        creating the file).

        If "creatll is successful, it returns as its value a IIfile
        descriptor", that is, a positive integer which is an index
        into a table of device and file control blocks. Whenever a
        call is made to one of the unbuffered i/o functions to
        access the file, its file descriptor must be included in
        the function I s parameters.

        If "creat" fails, it returns -1 and sets a code in the
        global integer "errno". If it succeeds, errno is not
        modified.

        The parameter "name" is a pointer to a character array
        containing the name of the file. The drive identifier in


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.       Page VI.ll
Aztec C II                                      LIBRARY FUNCTIONS

        the name is optional. If its included, the file will be
        created on the specified drive; otherwise, it will be
        created on the default drive.


        The parameter "pmode" is optional; if specified, it is
        ignored. The pmode parameter should be included, however,
        for programs for which UNIX-compatibility is required,
        since the UNIX creat function requires it. In this case,
        pmode should have an octal value of 0666.

1seek

        long int lseek(fd, offset, origin)
        int fd, origin;
        long offset;

        lseek sets the current position in the file specified by
        the fd parameter to the position specified by the offset
        and origin parameters.

        The current position is set to the location specified by
        the origin parameter plus the offset specified by the
        offset parameter,where the offset is a number of
        characters.

        The value of the parameter "origin" determines the basis
        for the offset as follows:

        o    offset is from beginning of file
        1    offset from the current position
        2    offset is from the end of file

        If lseek is successful, it returns as its value the new
        current position for the file; otherwise, it returns -1. In
        the latter case, the global integer errno is set to a
        symbolic value which defines the error. The symbolic values
        which lseek may set in errno are: EBADF, if the fd
        parameter is invalid; EINVAL, if the offset parameter is
        invalid or if the requested current position is less than
        zero. If lseek is successful, errno is not modified.

        Examples:

        1. To set the current position to the beginning of the
            file:

                    lseek(fd, OL, 0)

              lseek returns as its value 0, meaning that the current
              position for the file is character O.

        2.    To set the current position to the character following
              the last character in the file:



Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.      Page VI.12
Aztec C II                                    LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


                 Iseek(fd, OL, 2)

             Iseek returns as its value the current position of the
             end of the file, plus 1.

       3.    To set the current position 5 characters before the
             present current position:

                 Iseek(fd,-5L,l)

       4.    To set the current position 5 characters after the
             present current position:

                  Iseek(fd,5L,l)


open

       open (name ,rwmode)
       char *name;

       The function "open" prepares a device or file for
       unbuffered i/o and returns as its value an integer which
       must be included in the list of parameters for the i/o
       function calls which refer to this device or file.

       The name parameter is a pointer to a character string which
       is the name of the device or file which is to be opened.
       The names of the devices which can be opened are :

                 device name         device
                   con:              system console
                   1st: or prn:      line printer
                   pun:              punch device
                   rdr:              reader device

       The names can be either upper or lower case.

       When a disk file is to be opened, the name string can
       be a complete name; for example, "b:sample.ext   The drive
                                                        ll
                                                             •

       identifier and the colon character can be omitted; in this
       case the file is assumed to be on the default drive. The
       extent and preceeding period can also be omitted, if the
       file doesn't have an extent field.

       The "mode" parameter specif ies the type of access to the
       device or file which is desired, and optionally, for a disk
       file, specifies other functions which open should perform.
       The mode values are:

                 mode value          meaning
                    o RDONLY         read only
                    o WRONLY         write only
                    o RDWR           read and write
                    o CREAT          create file, then open it


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.     Page VI.13
Aztec   C II                                          LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


                                      truncate file, then open it
                                      if 0 EXCL and 0 CREAT are both
                                      set, open will fail if the
                                      file exists

        The integer values associated with the symbolic values for
        mode are defined in the file II fcntl.h     which can be
                                                             ll
                                                                  ,

        included in a user's program. To guarantee UNIX
        compatibility, a program should set the IImode parameter        ll


        using these symbolic names.

        The calling program must specify the type of access desired
        by incl uding exactly one of 0 RDONLY, 0 WRONLY, or 0 RDWR
        in the mode parameter. The-other values for mode are
        optional, and if specified,are    lIor-ed into one of the
                                                        ll


        type-of-access values.

        If only the 0 CREAT option is specified, the file will be
        created, if i t doesn't exist, and then opened. If the file
        does exist it is simply opened.

        If the 0 CREAT and 0 EXCL options are both specified, and
        if it didn't previously exist, it will be created and then
        opened. If i t did previously exist, the open will fail.


        If the 0 TRUNC option is specified, the file will be
        truncated- so that nothing is in it, and then will be
        opened. The truncation is performed by erasing the file, if
        it exists, then creating it. It S not an error to truncate
                                         1

        a file which doesn't previously exist.

        If both 0 CREAT and 0 TRUNC are specified, open proceeds as
        if only 0 TRUNC was specified.

          If open doesn't detect an error, it returns as its value an
          integer, called a IIfile descriptorll
                                               which must be included
                                                  ,

          in the list of parameters which are passed to the other
        . unbuffered i/o functions when performing i/o operations on
          the file. The file descriptor is different from the file
          pointer which is used for buffered i/o.

        If open does detect an error, i t returns as its value -1,
        and sets a code in the global integer errno which defines
        the error. The symbolic values which open may set in errno
        and their meanings are:

               errno value       meaning
               EMFILE            maximum number of open devices and
                                 files exceeded (ll's the limit)
               EACCES            invalid access requested
               ENFILE            maximum number of open files
                                 exceeded
               EEXIST            file already exists (when 0 CREAT
                                 and 0 EXCL are both specified)


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software systems, Inc.                     Page VI.14
Aztec C      II                                         LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


                  ENOENT                 unable to open file

        The file errno.h defines the integer values of the symbolic
        values. If open doesn't detect an error, errno isn't
        modified.

        Examples:

        1.        To open the system console for read access:

                       fd   = open(lIcon:II,O_RDONLY)
        2.        To open the line printer for write access:

                       fd   = open("1 s t",O_WRONLY)
        3.        To open the file "b:sample.ext" for read-only access
                  (the file must already exist):

                       fd = open(lb:sample.ext",O_RDONLY)

        4.        To open the file subl.c on the default drive, for
                  read-write access (if the file doesn't exist, it will
                  be created first):

                       fd   = open("subl.c",O_RDWR+O CREAT)
        S.        To create the file "main.txt", if it doesn't exist, or
                  to truncate it to zero length, if it already exists,
                  and then to open it for write-only access:

                       fd   = open(lmain.txt",O_WRONLY+O_TRUNC)



posit

        posit(fd,num)
        int fd,num:

        posit will set the current position for a disk file to a
        specified l28-byte record.

        This function should not be used when UNIX compatibility is
        required, because it isn't supported by UNIX.

        The parameter "fd" identifies the file: fd is the file
        descriptor which was returned to the caller by open when
        the file was opened.

        The parameter "num" is the number of the specified record,
        where the number of the first record in the is zero.

        If posit is successful, it returns 0 as its value.


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.              Page VI.IS
Aztec C II                                   LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



       If no error occurs, posit returns -1, and sets an error
       code in the global integer errno. The only symbolic value
       which may be set in errno is EBADF, in response to a bad
       file descriptor. If no error occurs, errno isn't mOdified.

       Examples:

       1.    to set the current position to the first byte in the
             first record:

                   posit(fd,O)

       2.    To set the current position to the first byte of the
             fourth record:

                   posit(fd,3)




read

       read (fd, buf,bufsize)
       int fd, bufsize; char buf;


       The read function reads characters from a device or disk
       file into the call e r' s buffer • In most cases , the
       characters ,are read directly into the caller's buffer.

       'rhe fd parameter specifies the file; it contains the file
       descriptor which was returned to the caller when the file
       was opened.

       The parameter buf is a pointer to the buffer into which the
       characters from the deive or file are to be placed.

       The parameter bufsize specifies the number of characters to
       be transfered.

       If the read operation is successful, it returns as its
       value the number of characters transfered.

       If the operation isn't sticcessful, read returns -1 and
       places a code in the global integer errno.

       For more information,      see the description on the
       unbuffered read operation for the various devices and for
       disk files in the chapter on unbuffered i/o.




Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page VI.16
Aztec C II                                      LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


rename


         rename (oldname, newname)
         char oldname[],newname[];

         The function "rename" changes the name of a file.

         The parameter "oldname" is a pointer to a character array
         containing the old file name, and "newname" is a pointer to
         a character array containing the new name of the file.

         If a file with the new name already exists, it is erased
         before the rename occurs.

         The value returned by rename is undefined. Unlike many
         other i/o functions, rename never modifies the global
         integer errno.

unlink


         unlink(name)
         char name[];

         The function "unlink" erases a file.

         The parameter "name" is a pointer to a character array
         containing the name of the file to be erased.

         unlink returns 255 as its value if the operation wasn't
         successful; otherwise it returns a value in the range 0 to
         3. Unlike many other i/o functions, unlink never modifies
         the global integer errno.




write

        write(fd,buf,bufsize)
        int fd, bufsize; char buf;

         The write function writes characters to a device or disk
         file from the caller's buffer. The characters are written
         to the device or file directly from the caller's buffer.

        The parameter "fd" specifies the device or file. It
        contains the file descriptor which was returned by the open
        function to the caller when the device or file was opened.

        The parameter "buf" is a pointer to the buffer containing
        the characters to be written.


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.      Page VI.17
Aztec C II                                     LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



        The parameter "bufsize" specifies the number of characters
        to be written.

         If the operation is successful, write returns as its value
         the number of characters written.

        If the operation is unsuccessful, write returns -1 and
        places a code in the global integer errno. If the operation
        is successful, errno is not modified.

         For more information on the detailed operation of the write
         function when writing to the different devices and to disk
         files, see the chapter on unbuffered i/o.

3.     string Manipulation

         These functions allow manipulation of "C" style strings as
         described in The ~ programming Language by Kernighan anq
         Ritchie.


atof
       double atof(cp)
       char *cp:
       ASCII to float conversion routine.



atoi

         int atoi(cp)
         char *cp:

        Converts ASCII string of decimal digits into an integer.
        Atoi will stop as soon as it encounters a non-digit in the
        string.


ato1

        long atol(cp)
        char *cp:
        ASCII to long conversion routine.



ftoa

        int ftoa (m,cp,precision,type)
        double m:
        char *cp:
        int precision:


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.     Page VI.lS
!\.ztec C II                                      LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


        int type:

        convert from float/double format to character format. The
        value of m is converted to ans ASCII string and assigned to
        *c. The precision operand specifies the number of digits to
        the right of the decimal point. Type can be

               o for E format
               1 for F format.



index

         char *index(cp,c)
         char *cp, c:

         Searches string cp for the letter specified by parameter
         "c". If the letter is found then the function returns a
         pointer to its position. Othersise a 0 is returned.

rindex

         char *rindex(cp,c)

         Functions the same as index, but the scan begins from the
         end of the string and moves towards the beginning.

sscanf

         int sscanf(string,control, argl, arg2,    ... )
         char *string
         char *control:

         Formats string according to control. Formating is done as
         described in chapter 7, Input and Output, of T~e ~
         programming Language.

strcmp

        strcmp(strl,str2)
        char *strl, *str2:

        Compares strl to str2 and returns: 0 (zero) if strings are
        equal, -1 (negative one) if strl is less than str2, and 1
        (one) if strl is greater than str2.


strcpy
         strcpy(dest,src)
         char *dest, *src:
         int max:



:opyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.          Page VI.19
Aztec C II                                    LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


        Copies the string pointed to by src into destination.


strlen

        strlen(str)
        char *stri
        Returns the length of str. The length does not include the
        null at the end of the string.


strncmp

        strncmp(strl,str2,max)
        char *strl, *str2i
        int maxi
     Compares strl to str2 the same as strcmp, but compares at
     most max characters.


strncpy

         strncpy(dest,src,max)
         char *dest, *src;
         int maXi

         copies the string pointed to by src into dest, but copies
         at most max characters. The destination may not be null
         terminated when copy is done.

4.utility Routines




alloc

         char *alloc(size)
         int size;
         Allocates memory with size numer of bytes and returns
         pointer to beginning.

blockmv

         blockmv(dest, src, length)
         char *dest, *src;
         int dest;
         Moves data from src to dest. The number of bytes is
         specified by parameter length. N 0 checking for overlap is
         performed.



Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.    Page VI.20
Aztec C II                                          LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


c1ear

         clear (area, length,value)
         char *area; int length, valuej

         Initializes length bytes starting at area with value.


exit

         exit(n)
         int n j

         Returns to the operating system. Any streams which have
         been opened with fopen but not closed with fclose will be
         closed at this time. If N is non zero then any submit that
         was in progress will abort.

format

         format(function,format,argptr)
         int (*function) ()j
         char *formatj unsigned *argptrj

         Formats data according to the string format and calls the
         given function with each character of the result. Formatting
         is done as described in chapter 7, Input and output, of The
         C programming Language. Note: the long and floating point
         conversions are not yet supported.

         e.g. The printf routine looks like this:

         printf(fmt,args)
         char *fmtj unsigned argSj

               int putchar()j
               format(putchar,fmt,&args)j


isdigit

         isdigit(c)
         int Cj

         Returns one if c is a digit, zero otherwise.


is10wer

         islower(c)
         int Cj

        Returns one    if   c   is   a   lower   case   alphabetic,   zero
        otherwise.



Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.           Page VI.2l
Aztec C II                                        LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



isupper

        issupper(c)
        char Ci
        Tests whether argument is an uppper case letter and returns
        non zero if it is and zero if not.

sprintf

         sprintf(buffer,format,argl,arg2, ••• )
         char *buffer, formati •••
        Formats data according to the string format and leaves the
        result in buffer. Formatting is done as described in
        chapter 7, .. Input and Output", of The f programming
        Language

to1ower

         tolower(c)
         int Ci
         If c is upper case,c is mapped to lower case and the new
         value returned; otherwise c is returned.


toupper

         toupper(c)
         int Ci
         If c is lower case, it is mapped to upper case and the new
         value returnedi otherwise c is returned.


5.     Operating System Interface

bdos

         bdos(bc,de)
         int bc,dei
         Calls the bdos with register pair BC set to bc and DE set
         to de. The value returned in register A is the return
         value.

bdos

         bdoshl(bc,de)
         int bc,dei
         Calls the bdos with register pair BC set to bc and DE set
         to de. The value returned in register pair HL is the return


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.        Page VI.22
Aztec C II                                    LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


         value.



bios

       bios(n,bc,de)
       int n,bc,de;
         Calls the n'th entry into the bios with BC set to bc and DE
         set to de. The returned value is the accumulator contents
         on return from the CP/M BIOS. N equal to zero is a cold
         boot.
biosh1

       bioshl(n,bc,de)
       int n,bc,de;
       'Calls the n'th entry into the bios with BC set to bc and DE
        set to de. The returned value is the HL register contents
        on return from the CP/M BIOS. N equal to zero is a cold
        boot.

CPM

         CPM(bc,de)
         int bc,de;

        Calls the bdos with register pair BC set to bc and DE set
       -to de. The value returned in A is the return value.

exit

         exit(n)
         int n;
       Returns to the operating system. Any streams which have
       been opened with fop en but not closed with fclose will be
       closed at this time. N is the return code, which is ignored
       in this release but may be used by future versions.


fcbinit

         fcbinit(name,fcbptr)
         char *narne; struct fcb *fcbptr;

       The   fcb structure is initialized to zeros and name is
       unpacked into the proper places. The   fcb structure is
       defined in lIio.c    The structure need not be used;
                           ll
                                •

       however, fcbptr must point to an area at least 36 bytes
       long.



Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.     Page VI.23
Aztec C II                                        LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



settop

       char *settop(size)
       unsigned size:

       The current top of available memory is moved up by size
       bytes and the old value of the top is returned. If the new
       top is within 512 bytes of the stack pointer, NULL will be
       returned.

6. Math and Scientific Routines

sqrt


       double sqrt(x);
       double X;

         sqrt is a function of one argument which returns as its
         value the square root of the argument. The type of the
         returned value is double.

         The argument which is passed to sqrt must be of type double
         and must be greater than or equal to zero.

         If sqrt detects an error, it sets a code in the global
         integer variable ERRNO and returns an arbitrary value to the
         caller. If sqrt doesn't detect an error, it returns to the
         caller without modifying ERRNO. Table 2.1.1 lists the
         symbolic values which sqrt may set in ERRNO and their
         meanings. The file MATH.H, which can be included in a user's
         module, declares ERRNO to be a global integer and defines
         the numeric value associated with each symbolic value.

EXAMPLE
         In the following program sqrt computes the square root of 2.
         If the computation returns a non-zero value in ERRNO, the
         ~rogram prints an error message.


         #inc1ude IIlibc.hll


         #include lIerrno.h"
         main() {
              double sqrt(),a;

              errno = 0;
              a = sqrt((double) 2);
              if (errno 1= 0) {
                   if (errno == EDOM)
                                                               ll
                        printf ("errno set to EDOM by sqrt \n       )   ;

                   else
                         printf( II invalid errno= %d returned by sqrt \n");
              }
       .}


Copyright 1982 (e) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.         Page VI.24
Aztec C II                                        LIBRARY FUNCTIONS




         Table 2.1.1      Error codes returned in ERRNO by sqrt


                   Code        sqrt(x)     Meaning

                   EDOM          0.0          x < 0.0


log

        double 10g(X)i
        double Xi

        log is a function of one argument which returns the natural
        logarithm of the argument as its value, as a double
        precision floating point number.

        The argument which is passed to log must be a double
        precision floating point number and must be greater than
        zero.

        I f log detects an error, it sets a code in the global
        variable ERRNO and returns an arbitrary valueiotherwise, it
        returns to the caller without modifying ERRNO. Table 2.2.1
        lists the symbolic values which log may set in ERRNO, the
        associated values returned by log, and the meaning.

         Table 2.2.1      Error codes returned in ERRNO by log


              I    Code        log(x)       Meaning
              -----------------------------------------
              I   EDOM I -HUGE               x <= 0.0


10910

        double 10glO(X)i
        double Xi
        10glO is a function of one argument which returns as its
        value the base-lO logarithm of the argument. The type of the
        returned value is double.

        The argument must be greater than zero, and must be of type
        double.

          If 10glO detects an error, it sets a code in the global
          integer ERRNO and returns an arbitrary value to the calleri
          otherwise, it returns to the caller without modifying ERRNO .
        . Table 2.3.1 lists the symbolic values which 10glO may set in


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.        Page VI.25
Aztec C II                                              LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


      ERRNO, the associated value returned by 10glO,                   and the
      meaning.



       Table 2.1.1       Error codes returned in ERRNO by 10glO


                 Code          10glO(x)       I   Meaning
             -----------------------------------------
                  EDOM         -5.2e15l       I      x <= 0.0


exp

      double exp(x);
      double x;


      exp is a function of one argument which returns as its value
      e**(argument). The type,of the returned value is double.

      The argument must be greater than -354.8 and less than
      349.3; it must be of type double.

      Ifexp is unable to perform the computation, it sets a code
      in the global integer ERRNO and returns an arbitrary value;
      otherwise, it returns the computed value without modifying
      ERRNO. Table 2.4.1 lists the symbolic values that exp may
      set in ERRNO, the associated value of exp, and the meaning.

       Table 2.1.1       Error codes returned in ERRNO by exp


                  Code         exp(x)             Meaning

               ERANGE     I   5.2e15l     I       x > 349.3
               ERANGE          0.0            I    x < -354.8


pow


      double pow(x,y);
      double x,y;

      pow is a function of two arguments, for example, x and y,
      which, when called, returns as its value x to the y-th
      power (x**y, in FORTRAN notation). x is the first argument
      to pow, and y the second. The value returned is of type
      double.

      The arguments must meet the following requirements:
           x cannot be less than zero;
           if x equals zero, y must be greater than zero;


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.               Page VI.26
Aztec C II                                              LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


             if x is greater than zero, then
                  -354.8 < y*log(x) < 349.3

      If pow is unable to perform the calculation, it sets a code
      in the global integer ERRNO and returns an arbitrary value:
      otherwise it returns the computed number as its value
      without modifying ERRNO. Table 2.6.1 lists the symbolic
      codes which pow may set in ERRNO, the associated value
      returned by pow, and the meaning.

       Table 2.1.1           Error codes returned in ERRNO by pow


             I        Code         pow(x,y)   I   Meaning
             ---------------------------------------------
             I    EDOM   I -5.2e151           I x<O or x=y=O
             I    ERANGE I 5.2e15l             I y*log(x) > 349.3
             I    ERANGE I 0.0                I y*log(x) < -354.8


sin

      double sin(x):
      double x:

      sin is a function of one argument which, when called,
      returns as its value the sine of the argument. The value
      returned is of type double.

      The argument is in radians, and its absolute value must be
      less than 6.7465e9. The type of the argument is double.

      If sin canlt perform the computation, i t returns an
      arbitrary value and sets a code in the global integer ERRNO:
      otherwise, it returns the computed number, without modifying
      ERRNO. Table 2.7.1 lists the symbolic codes which sin may
      set in ERRNO, the associated values returned by sin, and the
      meaning.

       Table 2.1.1           Error codes returned in ERRNO by sin


                      Code     I   sin(x)         Meaning
             ---------------------------------------------
                  ERANGE       I   0.0        labs(x) >= 6.7465e9 I



cos

      double cos(x):
      double x:

      cos    is   a   function of one argument which,           when called,


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.             Page VI.27
Aztec C II                                        LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


        returns as its value the cosine of the argument.              The
        returned value is of typ~ double.

        The argument is in radians, and its absolute value must be
        less than 6.7465e9. The type of the argument is double.

        If cos can't perform the computation, i t returns an
        arbitrary value and sets a code in the global integer ERRNO:
        otherwise, it returns the computed value, without modifying
        the associated value returned by cos, and the meaning.

         Table 2.1.1      Error codes returned in ERRNO by cos


             I     Code        cos (x)     Meaning
             ---------------------------------------------
             I   ERANGE        0.0       labs{x) >= 6.7465e9 I


tan

        double tan{x);
        double X;


        tan is a function of one argument which, when called,
        returns as its value the tangent of the argument. The type
        of the value returned is double.

        The argument is in radians, and its absolute value must be
        less than 6.7465e9. The type of the argument is double.

        If tan can't perform the computation, i t returns an
        arbitrary value and sets a code in the global integer ERRNO;
        otherwise, it returns the computed value without modifying
        ERRNO. Table 2.8.1 lists the codes which tan may set in
        ERRNO, the associated value returned by tan, and the meaning.

         Table 2.1.1      Error codes returned in ERRNO by tan


                   Code I tan{x)        Meaning
             ---------------------------------------------
                ERANGE I 0.0         labs{x) >= 6.7465e9 I


cotan

        double cotan(x);
        double X;


        cotan is a function of one argument which, when called,
        returns as its value the cotangent of the argument. The
        returned value is of type double.


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.        Page VI.28
Aztec C II                                         LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



       The argument is in radians, and its absolute value must be
       greater than 1.9le-152 and less than 6.7465e9. The type of
       the argument is double.

       If cotan can't perform the computation, it returns an
       arbitrary value and sets a code in the global integer ERRNO:
       otherwise, it returns the computed value without modifying
       ERRNO. Table 2.9.1 lists the symbolic codes which cotan may
       set in ERRNO, the associated value returned by cotan, and
       the meaning.

         Table 2.1.1      Error codes returned in ERRNO by cotan


                  Code          cotan{x)       Meaning

                ERANGE      I 5.2e151      I 0<x<1.91e-152
                ERANGE      I -5.2e151     I -1.9le-152 <x<O
                ERAt~GE     I 0.0          labs{x) >= 6.7465e9



asin
       double asin{x):
       double x:


       asin is a function of one argument which, when called,
       returns as its value the arcsine of the argument. The
       returned value is of type double.

       The absolute value of the argument must be less than or
       equal to 1.0. Its type is double.

       If asin can't perform the computation, i t returns an
       arbitrary value and sets a code in the global integer ERRNO:
       otherwise, it returns the computed value without modifying
       ERRNO. Table 2.10.1 lists the symbolic codes which asin may
       set in ERRNO, the associated values returned by asin, and
       the meaning.

         Table 2.1.1      Error codes returned in ERRNO by asin


                  Code      I   asin{x)        Meaning
             ---------------------------------------------
                EDOM        I   0.0          I abs(x) > 1.0

acos

         double acos(x):
       . double x:


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.             page VI.29
Aztec C II                                        LIBRARY FUNCTIONS




        acos is a function of one argument which, when called,
        returns as its value the arcosine of the argument. The
        returned value is of type double.

        The absolute value of the argument must be less than or
        equal to 1.0. It must be of type double.

        If acos can'g perform the computation, it returns an
        arbitrary value and sets a code in the global integer ERRNOi
        otherwise, it returns the computed value without modifying
        ERRNO. Table 2.11.1 lists the symbolic codes which acos may
        set in ERRNO, the associated value returned by acos, and the
        meaning.

         Table 2.1.1      Error codes returned in ERRNO by acos

             I     Code     I acos (x)        Meaning
             ---------------------------------------------
             I   EDOM          0.0         I abs(x) > 1.0

atan

        double atan(x)i
        double Xi
        atan is a function of one argument which, when called,
        returns as its value the arctangent of the argument. The
        returned value is of type double.

             The argument can be any real value, and must be of type
        double.

        Unlike many of the other math functions, atan never returns
        code in ERRNO.

atan2

        double atan2(y,x)i
        double y,xi

        atan2 is a function of two arguments, say x and y, which,
        when called, returns as its value the arctangent of y/x, in
        radians. y is the first argument, and x is the second. The
        returned value is of type double.

        The arguments can assume any real values, except that X and
        y cannot both be zero. If x equals zero, the value returned
        is also zero.



Copyright 1982 (C) by Hanx Software Systems, Inc.           Page VI.30
Aztec C II                                         LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


       If atan2 can't perform the computation, it returns an
       arbitrary value and sets a code in the global integer ERRNOi
       otherwise, it returns the computed value without modifying
       ERRNO. Table 2.12.1 lists the symbolic codes which atan2 may
       set in ERRNO, the associated values returned by atan2, and
       the meaning.

        Table 2.1.1     Error codes returned in ERRNO by atan2


                 Code     I atan2(x)        Meaning

                 EDOM        0.0         I x = y = 0

sinh

       double sinh(x)i
       double Xi


       sinh is a function of one argument which returns as its
       value the hyperbolic sine of the argument. The returned
       value is of type double.

       The absolute value of the argument            must be   less    than
       348.606839, and is of 'type double.

       If sinh can't perform the computation, it sets a code in the
       global integer ERRNO and returns an arbitrary value;
       otherwise, it returns the computed value without modifying
       ERRNO. Table 2.13.1 lists the symbolic codes which sinh may
       set in ERRNO, the value returned by sinh, and the meaning.

        Table 2.1.1     Error codes returned in ERRNO by sinh


                 Code     I sinh(x)       Meaning

               ERANGE     I 5.2e151     I abs(x)    > 348.606839   I

cosh

       double cosh(X)i
       double Xi


       cosh is a function of one argument which returns as its
       value the hyperbolic cosine of the argument. The value
       returned is of type double.

       The absolute value of the argument must be              less    than
       348.606839, and it must be of type double.



Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.         Page VI.31
Aztec C    II                                     LIBRARY FUNCTIONS


       If cosh can't perform the computation, it returns an
       arbitrary value and sets a code in the global integer ERRNOi
       otherwise,it returns the computed value without modifying
       ERRNO. Table 2.14.1 lists the symbolic codes which cosh may
       set in ERRNO, the associated values returned by cosh, and
       the meaning.

          Table 2.1.1     Error codes returned in ERRNO by cosh

                   Code     I cosh{x)       Meaning

                 ERANGE     I 5.2e15l     I abs{x) > 348.606839 I

tanh

       double tanh{x):
       double Xi


       tanh is a function of one argument which returns as its
       value the hyperbolic tangent of its argument. The value
       returned is of type double.

       The argument can be any real number whatsoever. It must,
       however, be of type double.

       Unlike some of the other math functions, tanh never modifies
       ERRNO, and always returns the computed value.




Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.        Page VI.32
Aztec   C II                            MICROSOFT COMPATIBILITY


                      MICROSOFT COMPATIBILITY

The Microsoft assembler (M80) and linker (L80) can be used wi th
the Aztec C II compiler. The "-Mil option must be specified on all
compilations targeted for the M80 assembler as in the following:

                         CII -M crtdrivr.c

Some older versions of L80 will not work with Aztec C II.

You must specify:

                    #include "libc.h"

in every module that will be used with the MICROSOFT system.



An 8080 library for use with the MICROSOFT L80 linker is supplied
on the distribution disk. Read the release document for more
details. Generally a Z80 Microsoft library will not be included
on the distribution disk and must be created. To create a library
to use with the L80 linker, all of the ".C" programs supplied on
the distribution disk must be compiled using the "-Mil option,
assembled with the M80 a~sembler, and placed in a Microsoft
library. The ".ASM" files supplied on the distribution disk must
also be assembled with M80 and placed in the library. Some of the
supplied assembler source has "8080" or "Z80" as part of the
filename. Only the 8080 versions should be assembled for an 8080
system, and only the Z80 versions should be assembled for a Z80
system. Code intended for assembly with the MICROSOFT MACRO-80
assembler should not include labels wi th leading "_".

You must specify .8080 to the MICROSOFT M80 assembler to assemble
source files created by Aztec C II. Z80 assembler subroutines
using Z80 mnemonics can be combined with the Aztec C II modules
by specifying .Z80 to the MICROSOFT assembler for the Z80 source
modules. The "rel" file outputs for .8080 and .Z80 are compatible.




Copyright 1982 (c) by Manx Software Systems,Inc.               VII.I
Aztec C II                                          ERROR CODES



                         ERROR MESSAGES

ERROR NUMBER          EXPLANATION

     1          bad digit in octal constant
     2          string space exausted (see COMPILER -z option)
     3          unterminated string
     4          compiler error in effaddr
     5          illegal type for function
     6          inappropriate arguments
     7          bad declaration syntax
     8          name not allowed here
     9          must be constant
     10         size must be positive integer
     11         data type too complex
     12         illegal pointer reference
     13         unimplemented type
     14         unimplemented type
     15         storage class conflict
     16         data type conflict
     17         unsupported data type
     18         data type conflict
     19         too many structures
     20         structure redeclaration
     21         missing ) I S ,
     22         struct decl syntax
     23         undefined struct name
     24         need right parenthesis
     25         expected symbol here
     26         must be structure/union member
     27         illegal type CAST
     28         incompatable structures
     29         structure not allowed here
     30         missing : on ? expr
     31         call of non-function
     32         illegal pointer calculation
     33         illegal type
     34         undefined symbol
     35         Typedef not allowed here
     36         no more expression space (see COMPILER -E option)
     37         invalid expression
     38         no auto. aggregate initialization
     39         no strings in automatic
     40         this shouldn't happen
     41         invalid initializer
     42         too many initializers
     43         undefined structure initialization
     44         too many structure initializers
     45         bad declaration syntax
     46         missing closing bracket
     47         open failure on include file
     48         illegal symbol name
     49         already defined
     SO         missing bracket


Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   page VIII.l
Aztec C II                                         ERROR CODES


     51        must be lvalue
     52        symbol table overflow
     53        multiply defined label
     54        too many labels
     55        missing quote
     56        missing apostrophe
     57        line too long
     58        illegal # encountered
     59        macro table full (see COMPILER -X option)
     60        output file error
     61        reference of member of undefined structure
     62        function body must be compound statement
     63        undefined label
     64        inappropriate arguments
     65        illegal argument name
     66        expected comma
     67        invalid else
     68        syntax error
     69        missing semicolon
     70        bad goto syntax
     71        statement syntax
     72        statement syntax
     73        statement syntax
     74        case value must be integer constant
     75        missing colon on case
     76        too many cases in switch (see COMPILER -Y OPTION)
     77        case outside of switch
     78        missing colon
     79        duplicate default
     80        default outside of switch
     81        break/continue error
     82        illegal character
     83        too many nested includes
     84        illegal character
     85        not an argument
     86        null dimension
     87        invalid character constant
     88        not a structure
     89        invalid storage class
     90        symbol redeclared
     91        illegal use of floating point type
     92        illegal type conversion
     93        illegal expression type for switch
     94        bad argument to define
     95        no argument list
     96        missing arg
     97        bad arg
     98        not enough args
     99        conversion not found in code table




Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems,Inc.   Page VIII.2
Aztec C II                                          ERROR CODES


                        ERROR PROCESSING

During run time three variables are used to enhance error
handling. An external variable "errno" is an integer that is set
to an error code by the I/O and scientific math routines.
"Sysvecll
          is an array used to control error processing for
floating point numbers. "flterr" is set to indicate floating
point arithmetic errors. "flterr" set to 0 indicates a good
result, a non~zero value indicates a bad result. See the section
on floating point support for more details.

"errno" is set to 0 at the beginning of each I/O request and is
set to a non-zero value if an error occurred.

"errno" is set to a non-zero value if an error occurred in
processing a scientific math function see section VI, Library
Functions for more information.

The definition for the various settings for errno is in file
errno.h. The following is the contents of errno.h for vl.05 of
Aztec C I I:

int errno:
#define ENOENT   -1     file does not exist
#define E2BIG    -2     not used
#define EBADF    -3     bad file descriptor - file is not open or
                        improper operation
#define ENOMEM   -4     insufficient memory for requested
                        operation
#define EEXIST   -5     file already exists on create request
#define EINVAL   -6     invalid argument
#define ENFILE   -7     exceeded maximum number of disk files
#define EMFILE   -8     exceeded maximum number of file
                        descriptors
#define ENOTTY   -9     not used
#define EACCES   -10    invalid access request

#define ERANGE   -20    invalid argument to math function:
                        function value can't be computed
#define EDOM     -21    invalid argument to math function:




Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page VIII.3
Aztec   C II                                         LIBUTIL LIBRARY UTILITY



                                 LIBRARY MAINTENANCE



LIBUTIL

A•   SU~l~1ARY


The LIBUTIL LIBrary UTILity is used in order to:

                      1. create a library
                      2. append a library             (-a)
                      3. produce an index list        (-t)
                      4. extract members              (-x)
                      5. replace a library            (-r)
                      6. create a library using       an
                         extended command line        (   .)
1.   LIBUTIL     -0   example. lib x.o x.o

                      USE -        to create a library
                      FUNCTION     the following creates a private library,
                                   example.lib, containing modules subl.o
                                   and sub2.o

                      >LIBUTIL   -0     example.lib subl.o sub2.o

2.   LIBUTIL      option-a

                      USE -     to append to a library
                      FUNCTION- the following appends          exmpl.o   to     the
                                example.lib

                      >LIBUTIL     -0   example.lib -a exmpl.o

                                  this function can be used to append any
                                  number of .0 files to the library. For
                                  example,     the   following   appends
                                  exmpl.o and smpl.o to the example.lib

                      >LIBUTIL    -0    example.lib -a exmpl.o smpl.o

                                  NB If a large number of files need to
                                  be appended to a library,       i t is
                                  advantageous to use the SUBMIT option
                                  ( see item 7)


3.   LIBUTIL     option-t

                      USE -     to produce an index listing of modules
                                in a given library
                      FUNCTION- the following displays a listing of all


Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.                   page IX.l
Aztec   C,II'                                  LIBUTIL LIBRARY UTILITY

                             modules in        a     particular   library,
                             example.lib:


                  >LIBUTIL   -0    example.lib -t

                             NB this function will allow only          one
                             library to be listed at a time

4.   LIBUTIL    option-x

                  USE -     a. copies a particular library module
                               into a relocatable object file
                            b. copies a complete library into
                               relocatable objec'tfiles
                  FUNCTION- a. the following copies library module,
                               exmpl into a relocatable object file:

                  >LIBUTIL   -0    example.lib -x exmpl
                             b. the following copies a complete
                                library, example.lib, (including all
                                modules contained within it) into
                                relocatable object files:

                  >LIBUTIL   -0    .example.lib -x

                             NB.     It should be noted that when
                                     copying a single module the LIBUTIL
                                     executes the command and returns.
                                     When copying a complete library,
                                     the LIBUTIL lists the modules being
                                     copied.

5. LIBUTIL      option-r

                  USE -     to replace a library module with the
                            contents of a relocatable object file
                  FUNCTION- the following replaces the library
                            module subl with the relocatable object
                            file subl.o
                  >LIBUTIL   -0    example. lib -r    subl.o



6. LIBUTIL -0 library name .
                  USE        to create a library using an extended
                             command line
                  FUNCTION the following creates a library,
                             charles.lib and appends to it subl.o,
                           . sub2.o, sub3.0, sub4.o, etc.

                  >xsub


Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.              Page IX.2
Aztec   C II                             LIBUTIL LIBRARY UTILITY


                LIBUTIL -0 charles lib •
                subl.o sub2.0 sub3.0 sub4.0



B.   DETAILED EXPLANATION
Creating a Library

The command for creating a library has the following two formats:

format 1:

LIBUTIL [-0 <output library name>] <input file list>

format 2:

LIBUTIL [-0 <output library name>] <input file list>
one or more lists, each an <input file list>

If the optional parameter [-0 <output library name>] is
specified, the name of the file containing the library to be
created is <output library name>; if this parameter is not
specified, the name of the file containing the library to be
created is "libc.lib". In either case, LIBUTIL proceeds by first
creating the library in a new file having a temporary name: if
the creation is successful; LIBUTIL then erases the file named
<output library file>, if it exists, and renames the file
containing the newly created library to <output library file>.

<input file list> defines the files containing the modules which
are to be placed in the library. An input file can be either (1)
a file created by the Manx assembler, AS, in which case it
contains a single relocatable object module, or it can be (2)
another library which was created by LIBUTIL. In either case, the
input files are not modified by LIBUTIL: LIBUTIL just copies the
modules in the input files to the output library.

An <input file list> is one or more names, separated by spaces. A
name can be one of the following: (1) a complete CP/M file name;
eg, b:subl.o; (2) a CP/M file name which doesn't specify the disk
drive on which the file resides: eg, subl.o; in this case,
LIBUTIL assumes the file is on the default disk drive; (3) a name
which doesn't specify an extension; in this case, LIBUTIL assumes
the file name is <name>.o. For example, if the name is subl,
LIBUTIL assumes the file name is' subl.o and is on the default
disk drive. If the name is b:subl, LIBUTIL assumes the file name
is b:subl.o.

When an input file contains a single relocatable object module,
the name by which the module is known in the library is the
filename, less the disk drive identifier and the extension. For
example, if the input file is b:subl.o, then the module name
within the created library is subl.



Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.      Page IX.3
Aztec   C II                               LIBUTIL LIBRARY UTILITY

When an input file is itself a library, the member names in the
created library are the same as the member names in the input
library. For example, if an input file is a library containing
modules subl, sub2, and sub3, then the name of these modules in
the created library are also subl, sub2, and sub3.
To specify that there are additional lines of <input file lists>,
a period surrounded by at least one space on either side must
appear in the <input file list> on the first line of the command.
Of course, LIBUTIL doesn't assume that such a period is a namei
it just acts as a flag to LIBUTIL, specifying that there are
additional lines of <input file list>s. Also, names can both
preceed and follow the period flag.
The order in which modules are placed in the created library is
specified by the order of the names in the input file lists.
If there is only one input file list, for example:
           subl.o sub2.0 sub3.0 ,

where the input files each contain a single relocatable object
module, then the order of the modules in the library would be:
subl, sub2, sub3.
If an input module is itself a library, then its modules are
copied to the created library in the same order. If there is
only one input file list, for example

           subl.o libl.lib sub2.0
where subl.o and sub2.o each contain a single relocatable object
module and libl.lib is a library containing modules sub3, sub4,
and subS, in that order, then the created library would contain
modules in the following order:

           subl, sub3, sub4, subS, sub2.
If there are additional lines of input file lists, then modules
are placed in the created library in the following order: first,
the modules in the files preceeding the period flag are placed in
the created library, as defined abovei second, the modules in the
additional input file lists are placed in the created library,
third, the modules in the files succeeding the period flag are
placed in the created library. For example, suppose LIBUTIL is
invoked with the following sequenc~:

LIBUTIL -0 newlib.lib subl.o • sub2.o
sub3.o sub4.0
s·ubS.o sub6.0

  If each of the input files contains a single relocatable object
  module, then the created library would contain the following
  modules in the specified order: subl, sub3, sub4, subS, sub6,
. sub2 •.

Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.       Page IX.4
Aztec   C II                                  LIBUTIL LIBRARY UTILITY




Listing the modu1es in a 1ibrary

To have LIBUTIL produce a listing of the modules in a library,
LIBUTIL must be invoked with a "dash parameter which contains
                                                       II

the character Itl. A dash parameter is simply a parameter which
has a dash (-) as its first character. LIBUTIL lists only the
modules in the library, not the functions.

The user can explicitly tell LIBUTIL the name of the library file
to be listed by including the character 10 1 in a dash parameter:
in this case, LIBUTIL assumes that the following parameter is the
name of the library file.

The user can implicitly tell LIBUTIL which library file is to be
listed by not including the character '0' in a dash parameter; in
this case, LIBUTIL assumes that the file libc.lib is to be
listed.

LIBUTIL will not perform multiple functions during a single
invocation. For example, you can't make it create a library and
then list the contents with only a single activatioQ .of LIBUTIL:
you would have to activate it to create the library, then
activate it again to list the contents.

The parameter list to LIBUTIL, when it is to perform a listing,
can include either one or two dash parameters. If one is used,
then both the' t' character and the '0' character (if specified)
are in it: in this case, they can appear in any order. If two
dash parameters are used, then one contains the single character
, t ' and the other the sin g 1 e character 10 1 • The only res t ric t ion
in this case is that the name of the library file must be the
parameter string immediately following the dash parameter which
has the '0'.

EXAMPLES:

LIBUTIL -t
          lists the modules in the library file libc.lib
LIBUTIL -ot example. lib
LIBUTIL -t -0 example.lib
LIBUTIL -0 example.lib -t
          each of these three lines causes LIBUTIL to list the
          modules in the library example.lib



Adding modu1es to a 1ibrary and rep1acing modu1es in a 1ibrary

LIBUTIL can be told to add modules to a library or replace
modules in a library by including one of the characters 'a' or
'r' in a dash parameter. There is only one function, which


Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.            Page IX.S
Aztec   C II                            LIBUTIL LIBRARY UTILITY

performs both an 'add ' operation and a 'replace ' operation.
Either character, tal or Irl causes LIBUTIL to perform the
function.    The user also tells LIBUTIL, either explicitly 0+
implicitly, the name of the library file on which the operation
is to occur and gives LIBUTIL a list of files whose modules are
to be added to or replaced in the library. Each of these files
can contain either a single relocatable object module or can be
itself a library. In the following paragraphs, the library file
on which the operation is to occur is called the 'subject library
file' and each file which is to be added or replaced is called an
I input file'.

LIBUTIL proceeds as follows: it qreates a library file with a
temporary name. Then it copies modules one at a time from the
subject library to the new library: before copying each module,
it checks whether there is a file in the input file list whose
name, less drive specification and extent, is the same as that of
the module: if not, the module is copied. If they do match,
LIBUTIL copies the contents of the matching file to the new
library, and the module from the subject library is not copied.
If, after LIBUTIL has processed all modules in the subject
library in this manner, any files in the input file list remain
which haven't been copied to the new library, LIBUTIL then copies
the contents of these files to the new library. Finally, LIBUTIL
erases the original subject library and renames the new library,
giving it the name of the subject library file.
The user can give LIBUTIL the name of the subject library either
explicitly or implicitly. To explicitly define it, the user
includes the character '0' in a dash parameter: the parameter
immediately following this dash parameter must then be the name
of the subject library file. To implicitly define it, the user
simply doesn't include the '0' character in adash parameter:
LIBUTIL then assumes that the name of the subject library file is
'libc .lib' .

All parameters which follow the dash parameters and the subject
file name are names of input files. The drive identifier and/or
the extent of these names can be optionally ommitted. If the
drive identifier is omitted, LIBUTIL assumes the file is on the
default drive. If the extent is omitted, LIBUTIL assumes the
extent is 'ext'.
LIBUTIL can be told to read additional input file names from one
or more lines on the console device by including the character
'.' in place of one of the input file names on the LIBUTIL
command line. In this case, LIBUTIL will read input file names
from the console until another 1.1 is read where a file name was
expected. LIBUTIL then continues reading input file names from
the original command line.
Once LIBUTIL has finished its copy-with-replace function frOln the
subject library to the new library, it will append the input
files which haven't been copied to the the new library in the
same order in which it read their names from the command lines.

Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.    Page IX.6
Aztec   C II                            LIBUTIL LIBRARY UTILITY



EXAMPLES
1. Let example.lib be a library file on the default disk drive
which contains the modules subl, sub2, and sub3. To append the
module in the file newsub.o, which is also on the default drive,
to example. lib any of the following commands could be issued:

LIBUTIL -oa example.lib newsub
LIBUTIL -oa example. lib newsub.o
LIBUTIL -ao example.lib newsub
LIBUTIL -a -0 example.lib newsub.o
LIBUTIL -0 example.lib -a newsub
After LIBUTIL is done, there will be a new library file named
example.lib, and it will contain the following modules, in the
order specified: subl, sub2, sub3, and newsub. The module in the
file newsub.o doesn't have a name: it only gets one when a copy
of it is placed in a library. The name of the module is derived
from the name of the file in which it was originally contained by
stripping that file name of the disk drive prefix and extent
suffix. In this example, the name of the module which is appended
to example.lib is thus 'newsub'. Just to beat this example to
death, suppose that we are back at the point at which we have the
original example.lib, containing modules subl, sub2, and sub3,
and that we have the file newsub.o. After entering the following
commands:

rename sub4.0=newsub.o
LIBUTIL -oa example. lib sub4
example.lib will contain modules named subl, sub2, sub3, sub4.


2. Let example. lib contain the modules subl, sub2, and sub3: and
let newlib.lib contain the modules newsubl, newsub2, and newsub3.
We can tell LIBUTIL to append the modules in newlib.lib to
example.lib by entering any of the following lines:

LIBUTIL -oa example. lib newlib.lib
LIBUTIL -a -0 example.lib newlib.lib
LIBUTIL -0 example. lib -a newlib.lib
After LIBUTIL is done, there will be anew example.lib; and it
will contain the following modules, in the specified order: subl,
sub2, sub3, newsubl, newsub2, newsub3.

To illustrate another point, let's rerun LIBUTIL again with the
comand specified above, starting with the original example.lib,
containing subl, sub2, and sub3, and with the library file
newlib.lib containing the modules sub3, newsubl, subl, and
newsub2. After LIBUTIL completes, there will be a new
example.lib, and it will contain the following modules, in the
specified order: subl, sub2, sub3, sub3, newsubl, subl, newsub2.
The first subl module in the new example.lib will be that from

Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software systems, Inc.    Page IX.7
Aztec   C II                             LIBUTIL LIBRARY UTILITY

the original example. lib, and the second will be from newlib.lib.
The first sub3 module in the new example.lib will be from the
original example. lib, and the second will be from newlib.lib. The
point being exemplified is that LIBUTIL will not replace modules
in the original library with modules from an input library; it
will only append modules in the input library to the subject
library.                                                    .



3. Let example.lib be a library containing the modules subl,
sub2, and sub3. To replace module sub2 with the contents of the
file named sub2.0 and to append the modules in the library file
newlib.lib ( which are modI, mod2, and mod3) and the module in
the file
newsubl.o to example.lib any of the following commands could be
entered:

LIBUTIL -oa example.lib sub2 newlib.lib newsubl
LIBUTIL -a -0 example. lib sub2.o newlib.lib newsubl.o

After LIBUTIL is done, there will be a new example.lib file, and
it will contain the following modules, in the order specified:
subl, sub2, sub3, modI, mod2, mod3, and newsubl. The sub2 module
in the new example.lib is the same as that in sub2.0.


4.  Let example.lib be a library containing the modules subl,
sub2, and sub3. The following submit file, when
activated, will cause LIBUTIL to replace module sub2 with the
module in file sub2.o, and append the modules in the library
newlib.lib (which are modI, mod2, and mod3), and the modules in
the files newsubl.o, newsub2.o, newsub3.o, newsub4.o, newsub5.o,
newsub6.0, and newsub7.o:

xsub
LIBUTIL -oa example.lib newsubl.o • newsub7 sub2
newsub2 newsub3 newsub4
newlib.lib newsub5
newsub6


After LIBUTIL is done, there will be a new example.lib,
containing the following modules, in the specified order': subl,
sub2, sub3, newsubl, newsub2, newsub3, newsub4, modI, mod2, mod3,
newsub5, newsub6, ne''lsub7. The module sub2 will be a copy of that
in the file sub2.0.




Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.        Page IX.8
Aztec C II                            Buffered I/O - I/O Redirection


                     I/O Redirection and Buffered I/O

.. c .. has two basic types of I/O, namely buffered, sometimes called
stream I/O,      and unbuffered. Unbuffered I/O is discussed in
another section. Buffered I/O tends to be less efficient than
unbuffered I/O, but is easier to use.

There are three standard files in Aztec e l l :   stdin, stdout,
and stderr. When a program is started these three files are
opened automaticaly and file pointers are provided for them. The
getchar and scanf functions read from the stdin file.        The
putchar and printf functions output to the stdout file.      Run
time error messages are directed to stderr.

The default device for stdin, stdout, and stderr is "CON:". The
destination for stdin and stdout can be "redirected" to a disk
file or another device. To redirect stdin, specify on the command
line a 11(11 followed by the file name or device, for example:

             myprog parmI parm2 ( input.fil

When   IImyprogll executes,  all getchar        requests   and   scanf
requests will read from file input.fil.

To redirect stdout, specify on the command line a ">" followed by
the file name or device, for example:

             myprog parmI parm2 > prn:

When IImyprog" executes,    all output requests to putchar and
printf will be directed to the printer device PRN:.

 s tdin ll and "stdout" can be used just as any other file pointer.
II

Any I/O performed with these file pointers will be redirected if
redirection was requested.


I/O can be redirected to any file or the devices:

                                   LST:
                                   PRN:
                                   PUN:
                                   RDR:
The above devices can be specified as the IIfile name" to fopen
and open.      Any I/O to the returned file pointer      (fp)  or
file descriptor (fd) will be directed to the specified device.
"CON: II can also be specified as a device to fopen and open. For
example:

             #include IIlibc.h"
             main ( )
             {
             char Ci
             FILE * f l i


Copyright 1982 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.          PAGE X.I
Aztec C II                             Buffered I/O - I/O Redirection


                 fl=fopen ( "lst: "w" ) i
                               II ,

                 fputs(lIthis is going to the list device LST:\n",fl);
             }

There are a number of library routines for buffered I/O. The
reader is directed to the LIBRARY section of this manual and
chapter 7 of The f programming Language for more information.




Copyright 1982 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.           PAGE X.2
Aztec C II                                          OVERLAY SUPPORT



MANX Over1ay Support

In order to allow users to run programs which are larger than the
limited memory size of a microcomputer,    MANX provides overlay
support. This feature allows a user to divide a program into
several segments; one of the segments, called the root segment,
is always in memory. The other segments, called overlays, reside
on disk and are only brought into memory when requested by the
root segment. There is only one area of memory into which
the overlays are loaded.

If an overlay is in the overlay area of memory when the root
requests that another be loaded, the newly specified overlay
segment overlays the first.

MANX allows overlays to be "nested"; that is, an overlay at one
level can call an overlay at another level. However, an overlay
cannot call another overlay which is at the same level.

                      How to Make an Overlay File

What is an Overlay?
               An overlay is one or more sections of executable
               code that run in the same area of memory. The
               advantage of an overlay,    therefore, is that it
               allows the user to run programs of unlimited size
               in a machine which has a limited memory capacity.

How do I Call an Overlay From a program?

               The following is the format for calling an overlay:

                       ovloader(overlay name,pl, p2, p3 .•• )

               The ovloader function's first parameter must be
               the name of the overlay file. The parameters pI,
               p2, p3 are passed directly to the overlay. The
               overlay is loaded    from  a file whose name is
               overlay name and whose extent is .ovr. ovloader
               returns as its value the value which was returned
               by the overlay.

How do I Make a Function an Overlay?

               The name of the function must be changed to
               'ovmain'. The overlay doesn't have to know that
               it's an overlay.   An overlay is activated in the
               normal way,   and performs a normal return.

What Files are Created on the Disc?

 . com         The file which contains the root has the         extent
               of .com


Copyright 1983 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.          PAGE XI.l
Aztec C II                                           OVERLAY SUPPORT


 .ovr              There is one file for each overlay, the extent
                   of which is .ovr

 .rsm              There is a file containing the relocatable symbol
                   table with the extent .rsm for the root and for
                   any overlay that invokes another overlay.

Sample Run:

              1)     In -r myroot.o ovloader.o libc.lib math.lib

              2)     In mysubl.o myroot.rsm ovbgn.o li1;>c.lib math. lib

              3)     In mysub2.o myroot.rsm ovbgn.o libc.lib math. lib


                   In the. first step, the executable file myroot.com
                   is created. The file myroot •. rsm is also created,
                   for use in steps 2 and 3.

                   In step 2, an overlay will be created and placed
                   in the file mysubl.ovr. The file myroot.rsm, which
                   was created during step 1, tells the linker that
                   an overlay is to be created. The -r option is
                   not specified on the    second link edit     since
                   mysubl does not invoke another overlay.

                   In step 3,-another overlay is created and placed
                   in the file mysub2.ovr.

                   The overlays in mysubl.ovr and mysub2.ovr run in
                   the same memory space.




Copyright 1983 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.           PAGE XI.2
Aztec "C II                                          OVERLAY SUPPORT


     address

      x'100'     +-----------------------------+
                 I        base module           I
      x'9FO'     +-----------------------------+
                 I          module 1            I
      x'lC20'    +-----------------------------+
                 I          module 2            I
                 +-----------------------------+
                                  Figure 1
                A single binary image with 3 segments




                  +-----------------------------+
                  I   base root module
                             II       II         I
                                                      x'100'

  x ' 9FO '
                  +-----------------------------+
                       I                    I                x ' 9FO '
+-----------------------------+
I           module 1           I
                                    +---~-------------------------+
                                     I          module 2               I
+-----------------------------+ +-----------------------------+
                              ,Figure 2

          Layout of the program in Figure 1 as an Overlay

Figure 1 shows a program that can be logicaly divided into three
segments as it would look if run as a single module. Figure 2
shows the same program run as an overlay. In figure 2 module 1
and module 2 occupy the same memory locations. A possible flow of
control would be for the base routine to call module I, module 1
then returns to the root and the root calls module 2, module 2
returns to the root and the root calls module 1 again. Then
module 1 returns to the root the root exits to the operating
system. Notice that all overlay segments must return to their
caller and that overlays at the same level cannot directly invoke
each other.




programmer Information

The root causes an overlay to be loaded into memory and control
to be passed to it by calling the MANX-supplied function
"ov1oader", which must reside in the root segment. The parameters
to ov1oader are a character string, giving the name of the
overlay to be loaded,  followed by the parameters which are to be
passed to the overlay. "ovloader" is the same type as the
overlays.
When' the overlay is loaded,        control passes to the MANX-supplied


Copyright 1983 (c) by Manx Software SY.stems, Inc.          PAGE XI.3
Aztec C II                                      OVERLAY SUPPORT


function "ovbgn", which must be the first function of the
overlay.    In turn, ovbgn transfers control to the function
lIovmain" in the overlay. ovmain is passed the parameters which
were passed to ovloader.

When    ovmain completes   its processing,   it simply returns.
Control then passes back to       the root segment,     at the
instruction in the user's program foilowing the one that called
ovloader. The value returned by ovloader is that returned by
ovmain.


Overlays can be nested; that is an overlay can call another
overlay, as long as they aren't both on the same 'level'. Also,
an overlay can access any global functions and variables which
are defined within itself or within the calling segment.

There are three caveats for overlay usage. First, the root
segment must have a call to the function. Isettopl before any
files are opened or any overlays are called. settop must be
passed a value greater than or equal to the size of the largest
overlay, or the longest 'thread ' of overlays, if overlays are
nested. The size of an overlay is displayed on the console, in
hex, when it is linked. For example, if your program uses 3
overlays, and the linker says their sizes are 125ah, 236h, and
837h, then the program should make the following call:
settop(Oxl25a). The parameter to settop in this case could be
larger, if desired.

Second, if buffered I/O is used in an overlay, then at least one
buffered I/O call must exist in the root. This can be
accomplished, for example, by calling the 'printf' function in
the root. It isn't necessary that printf actually be called, only
that it be present.

Thirdr, if an overlay performs floating point or long integer
operations, the root segment must also. It isn't necessary that
these operations in the root be executed, only that they exist in
the root.

Two examples follow. The first demonstrates overlay usage when
overlays are not 'nested'. The second demonstrates nested
overlays.
Examp1e

In this example, the root segment, which consists of the function
"main" and any neccesary run-time library routines, behaves as
follows:

     (1) it calls the overlay ovlyl, passing it as parameter a
         pointer to the string IIfirst message ll •
     (2) it prints the integer value returned to it by ovlyl;
     (3) it calls the overlay ovly2, passing it a pointer to the
         string "second message ll ;        .




Copyright 1983 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.     PAGE XI.4
Aztec C II                                                OVERLAY SUPPORT


     (4) it prints the integer value returned to it by ovly2.

The overlay segment ovlyl consists of the function ovlyl,      the
MANX function ovbgn, and any neccesary run-time library routines.
It prints the message lIin ovlylll plus whatever character string
was passed to it by main.

The overlay segment ovly2 consists of the function ovly2,         the
function ovbgn,  and any neccesary run-time library routines.      It
prints the message lIin ovly2 11 , plus whatever character string was
passed to it by main.

Here then is the main function:

     #define MAXOVLY OxlOOO
     main () {
           int a:

             settop (MAXOVLY):
             a = o v loader (lIovlylll , II first message ll ):
             printf(lIin main. ovlyl returned %d\n", a):
             a = ovloader(lIovly211,lIsecond message ll ):
             printf(lIin main. ovly2 returned %d\nll,a):
     }

Here is ovlyl:

     ovmain(a)
     char *ai
     {
             printf(lIin ovlyl. %s\n",a):
             return 1;
     }

Here is ovly2:

     ovmain(a)
     char *a:
     {
          printf("in ovly2. %s\nll,a);
          return 2 i
     }

The following commands link the root               (which is in the       file
root.c) and the overlays:

     In -r root.o ovloader.o libc.lib
     In ovlyl.o ovbgn.o root.rsm libc.lib
     In ovly2.0 ovbgn.o root.rsm libc.lib

When the segments are generated and the corn file            activated,    the
following messages appear on the console:

     in ovlyl. first message.
    -in main. ovlyl returned 1.


Copyright 1983 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.                 PAGE XI.S
Aztec C II                                                    OVERLAY SUPPORT


     in ovly2. second message.
     in main. ovly2 returned 2.


Examp1e 2: nested over1ays

In this example, there are three segments: a root segment,
'root', and two overlays segments, 'ovlyl' and 'ovly2 1 • root
calls ovlyl. ovlyl calls ovly2. ovly2 just returns.

Here is the root:

     #define MAXOVLY OxlOOO
     maine )
     {
             set top (MAXOVLY) i
             ovloader ( "ovlylll ,. in ovlylll) i
                                       II

     }


Here is ovlyl:

     ovmain(a)
     char * ai
     {
             printf( "%s\n" ,a) i
             ovloader(" ovl y 2 11 ,        "in ovly2 11 )i
     }

Here is ovly2:

     ovmain(a)
     char *ai
     {
             printf( lI%s\n ll ,a) i
     }

The following commands link the root and the two overlays:

     In -r root.o ovloader.o libc.lib
     In -r ovlyl.o ovbgn.o ovloader.o root.rsm libc.lib
     In ovly2.o ovbgn.o ovlyl.rsm libc.lib
When executed, the following messages appear on the console:

     in ovlyl
     in ovly2



Creating a root segment and over1ay segments

To create a root segment and one or more overlay segments, the
MANX linker IIln" must be run several times. Each execution
creates one segment and places it in a separate disk file. The


Copyright 1983 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.                   PAGE XI.6
Aztec C II                                      OVERLAY SUPPORT


first execution must create the root segment. This execution also
creates a file containing a symbol table, which must be specified
during the subsequent executions of In which create the overlay
segments.

When creating a segment which calls an overlay, the option I_rl
must be specified; this causes In to generate a symbol table for
use in linking the called overlays. The table is in a file whose
filename is the same as that of the first file specified in the
command line and whose extent is I.rsm ' •

When creating a segment which is called by another segment, the
I.rsml file which was generated during the linking of the calling
program must be specified. This causes the linker to create an
overlay in the file whose filename is the same as that of the
first file specified in the command line and whose extent is
I • ovr I •

If a segment is both called by another segment and calls another
segment, the command line to the linker must specify both the
I.rsm l file of the calling segment and the I_rl option.




Copyright 1983 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.     PAGE XI.?
Aztec C II                                          Data Formats



Data Formats

1. cbaracter

    Characters are 8 bit ASCII.

    Strings are terminated by a NULL (X'QQ').

    For computation characters are promoted to integers with       a
    value range from 0 to 255.

2. pointer

    Pointers are two bytes (16 bits) long. The internal
    representation of the address FOAB stored in location 100
    would be:
    location    contents in hex format


      100             AB
      101             FO


3. int, sbort

    Integers are two bytes long. A negative value is stored in
    two's compliment format. A -2 stored at location 100 would
    look like:

    location     contents in hex format

    100          FE
    101          FF


4. long

    Long integers occupy four bytes. Negative values are stored
    in    two's  complement representation. Longs are stored
    sequentially with the least significant byte stored at the
    lowest memory addres and the most significant byte at the
    highest memory address.

5. float and double

    Floating point numbers are stored as 32 bits, doubles are
    stored as 64 bits. The first bit is a sign bit. The next 7
    bits are the exponent in excess 64 notation. The base for the
    exponent is 256. The remaining bytes are the fractional data
    stored in byte normalized format. A zero is a special case
    and is all 0 bits. The hexadecimal representation for a float
    with a value of 1.0 is:



Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software SY$tems, Inc.    Page XII.l
Aztec C II                                          Data Formats


                        41 01 00 00

    A 255.0 would be:

                        41 FF 00 00

    A 256.0 would be:

                        42 01 00 00




Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software systems, Inc.     Page XII.2
Aztec C II                         ASSEMBLY LABGUAGE SUPPORT



A. Imbedded Assembler Source

Assembly language statements can be imbedded in a "C" program
between an "#ASM" and "#ENDASM" statement. Both statements must
begin in column one. No assumptions should be made concerning the
contents of registers. The environment should be preserved and
restored. Caution should be used in writing code that depends on
the current code generating techniques of the compiler. There is
no guarantee that future releases will generate the same or
similar patterns.

B. Assembler Subroutines


     INTERFACING ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE ROUTINES WITH "C" PROGRAMS
                                            ---- --- ---------
The calling conventions used by the Aztec C II compiler are very
simple. The arguments to a function are push'ed onto the stack in
reverse order, i.e. the first argument is pushed last and the
last argument is pushed first. The function is then called using
the 8080 CALL instruction. When the function returns, the
arguments are removed from the stack. A function is required to
return with the arguments still on the stack unless something is
pushed back in place of them. Registers BC, IX, and IY must be
preserved by routines called from C. The function's return value
should be in HL and the Z fiag set according to the value in HL.
For examples of assembly code called by "C" programs refer to
the string.asm and toupper.asm files supplied with the package.
Example:

: Copyright (C) 1981 Thomas Fenwick
        public isupper_
isupper :
       -lxi h,2      hI := stack pointer + 2 (arguement address)
        dad sp
        mov a,m      load argument into accumulator via hI
        cpi 'A'
        jc false
        cpi 'Z'+l
        jnc false
true:
        lxi h,l
        mov a,l
        ora a
        ret
.
I

        public islower
islower
       -lxi h,2
        dad sp
        mov a,m
        cpi 'al
        jc false


Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page XIII.l
Aztec C II                        ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE SUPPORT


         cpi 'z'+l
         jc true
false:
         lxi h,'O
         mov a,l
         ora a
         ret




Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page XIII.2
Aztec C II                                      ROMab1e Code



Aztec C II produces reentrant code that is ROMable. The basic
tools for producing ROMable code are provided by the Manx LN
linkage editor. With the -B option of the linkage editor, the ROM
address for the code can be set. With the -D option of the
linkage editor, the RAM address of the variable data can be set.
The code and data are written to a single file. The code precedes
the data. The linkage editor produces a message showing the code
size and the data size. Separating the code from the data is the
responsibility of the user.

The user must also rewrite CALLCPM.ASM. This routine sets up the
stack and calls croot.c to handle the command line arguments and
the settup for I/O redirection. In most cases all that needs to
be done is to preserve the environment, set up the stack and call
the "C" routine. Exit returns to this routine. In most cases exit
processing will involve restoring the entry environment and
perhaps passing back data.

If space is tight,     the standard library functions can be
eliminated. Most library routines can be easily eliminated. The
support routines cannot. The compiler generates calls to these
routines for standard processing. A basic library can be created
by breaking the support modules,   like supp8080.asm, into their
basic components.    If float and long support are not needed the
supp8080.asm routines should be sufficient. If this module is not
broken up its full size is less than .5K with most of the space
taken up by int mUltiply and divide routines. If these routines
are not needed then they can be eliminated. I/O in a "strippped"
system would be performed by bios or bdos calls.




Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page XIV.l
Aztec C II                              FLOATING POINT SUPPORT



Aztec C II    'Floating Point Support


Aztec C II supports floating point numbers of type float and
double. All arithmetic operations (add, subtract, multiply, and
divide) can be performed on floating point numbers, and
conversions can be made from floating point representation to
other other representations and vice versa.

The common conversions are performed automatically, as specified
in the K & R text. For example, automatic conversion occurs when
a variable of type 'float ' is assigned to a variable of type
lint', or when a variable of type lint' is assigned to a variable
of type 'float', or when a 'float ' variable is added to an lint'
variable.

other conversions can be expicitly requested, either by using a
'castl operator or by calling a function to perform the
conversion. For example, if a function expects to be passed a
value of type 'int', the (int) cast operator can be used to
convert a variable of type 'float ' to a value of type lint',
which is then passed to the function. For another example, the
function 'atof' can be called to convert a character string to a
value of type I double ' •

The following sections provide more detailed information of the
floating point system. One section describes the internal
representation of floating point numbers and another describes
the handling of exceptional conditions by the floating point
system.


F10ating point exceptions

When a c program requests that a floating point arithmetic
operation be performed, a call will be made to functions in the
floating point support software. While performing the operation,
these functions check for the occurence of the floating point
exception conditions; namely, overflow, underflow, and division
by zero. On return to the caller, the global integer 'flterr'
indicates whether an exception has occurred. If the value of this
integer is zero, no error occurred, and the value returned is the
computed value of the operation. otherwise, an error has
occurred, and the value returned is arbitrary. Table A lists the
possible settings of flterr, and for each setting, the associated
value returned and the meaning.

   I flterr      value returned         meaning

       o         computed value         no error has occurred
       1         +/- 2.ge-157           underflow
       2         +/- 5.2e15l            overflow
       3         +/- 5.2e15l            division by zero
   -~~--------------------------------------------------------



Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.    Page XV.l
Aztec C II                              FLOATING POINT SUPPORT



When a floating point exception occurs, in addition to returning
an indicator in 'flterr', the floating point support routines
will either log an error message to the console or call a user-
specified function. The error message logged by the support
routines define the type of error that has occurred (overflow,
underflow, or division by zero) and the address, in hex, of the
instruction in the user's program which follows the call to the
support routines.

Following the error-message-logging or user-function-calling, the
floating pOint support routines return to the user's program
which called the support routines.
To determine whether to log an error message itself or to call a
user's function, the support routines check the first pointer in
Sysvec, the global array of function pointers. If it contains
zero (which it will, unless the user's program explicitly sets
it), the support routines log a message; otherwise, the support
routines call the function pointed at by this field.

A user's function for handling floating point exceptions can be
written in C. The function can be of any type, since the support
routines don't use the value returned by the user's function. The
function has two parameters: the first, which is of type 'int',
is a code identifying the type of exception which has occurred. 1
indicates underflow, 2 overflow, and 3 division by zero.

The second parameter passed to the user's exception-handling
routine is a pointer to the instruction in the user's program
which follows the call instruction to the floating point support
routines. One way to use this parameter would be to declare it to
be of type lint'. The user's routine could then convert it to a
character string for printing in an error message.

Two programs follow. One is a sample routine for handling
floating point , followed by excepltions. The routine displays an
error message, based on the type of error that has occurred, and
returns to the floating point support routines. The other is
main(), which sets a pointer to the error-handling routine in the
sysvec array.

#include "libc.lib"

main() {
     sysvec[FLT_FAULT] = usertrap;
}

usertrap(errcode,addr)
int errcode,addr;
{
     char buff[4];
     convert(addr,buff);   /* convert addr to hex char string in buff */
     switch (errcode) {

Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.    Page XV.2
Aztec C II                                FLOATING POI1ft' SUPPORT


             case '1':
                  printf("floating point underflow at %s\n",buff):
                  break;
             case 121:
                  printf("floating point overflow at %s\n",buff);
                  break;
             case 13 1 :
                  printf("floating point division by zero at %s\n",buff);
                  break;
             default:
                  printf("invalid code %d passed to usertrap\n",errcode);
                  break;
     }


Interna1 representation of floating point numbers

F10ats

A variable of type 'float' is repesented internally by a sign
flag, a base-256 exponent in excess-64 notation, and a three-
character, base-256 fraction. All variables are normalized.

The variable is stored in a sequence of four bytes. The most
significant bit of byte 0 contains the sign flag; 0 means it's
positive, 1 negative.

The remaining seven bits of byte 0 contain the excess-64
exponent.

Bytes 1,2, and 3 contain the three-character mantissa, with the
most significant character in byte 1 and the least in byte 3. The
Idecimal point' is to the left of the most significant byte.

As an example, the internal representation of decimal 1.0 is 41
01 00 00.

Doub1es

A floating point number of type 'double' is represented
internally by a sign flag, a base-256 exponent in excess-64
notation, and a seven-character, base-256 fraction.

The variable is stored in a sequence of eight bytes. The
most significant bit of byte 0 contains the sign flag: 0 means
positive, 1 negative.

The excess-64 exponent is stored in the remaining seven bits
of byte O.

The seven-character, base-256 mantissa is stored in bytes 1
through 7, with the most significant character in byte 1, and the
least in byte 7. The 'decimal point' is to the left of the most
significant character.



Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.      Page XV.3
Aztec C II                             FLOATING POINT SUPPORT


As an example, (256**3)*(1/256 + 2/256**2) is represented by
the following bytes: 43 01 02 00 00 00 00 00.
F10ating Point Operations

For accuracy, floating point operations are performed using
mantissas which are 16 characters long. Before the value is
returned to the user, it is rounded.




Copyright (c) 1982 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   Page XV.4
Aztec C II                       SID/ZSID Debugging support



Digital Researches SID and ZSID symbolic debuggers. can be used
with the Aztec C II system. The -T option in the link edit step
wil create a symbol table. PIP or some other utility can be used
to upper case the symbols for SID if necessary.




Copyright 1982 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   PAGE XVI.l
Aztec C II                                Unbuffered I/O




Unbuffered I/O

This section describes how a program accesses devices and files
using the functions defined in chapter 8 of the K&R text. A
program which acccesses devices and files using these functions
will also be able to run on a UNIX system.
The basic input/output support functions allow a program to
access the console, printer, reader, punch, and the files on any
disk. The support functions are:
     creat          creates a disk file
     unlink         deletes a disk file
     rename         renames a disk file
     open           prepares a device or file for I/O
     close          concludes the I/O operations on a device or file
     read           reads data from a device or file
     write          writes data to a device or file
     posit          positions a disk file to a specific record
     lseek          positions a disk file to a specific character
Generally, to access a device or file, a program first must call
the "open" function, passing it the name of the device or file
and a code indicating the type of operations the program intends
to perform. Open returns a file descriptor" which the program
                            II

must include in the parameters which are passed to other
functions when accessing the device or file. This file descriptor
is an integer which is an index into a table, called the "channel
table". Each entry in this table is a control block describing a
device or file on which the program is performing I/O operations.
For more details on the "open function, see the chapter on the
                                 ll


unbuffered i/o functions.
The only exception to the rule requiring the opening of devices
and files prior to the issuance of program i/o with them regards
the logical devices stdin, stdout, and stderr. When the program
first gets control, these logical devices have already been
opened by the system: hence, the program can issue i/o calls to
them without opening them itself.
Generally,after a program has completed its i/o to a device or
file, it must call the "close function to allow the system to
                                 ll


release the control blocks which it has allocated to the device
or file. The only exception to this rule is that the logical
devices stdin, stdout, and stderr never need be closed.

In the remainder of this section, the details of program i/o to
the various devices and disk files are presented.




Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   PAGE XVII.l
Aztec C II                                Unbuffered I/O

Conso1e I/O

There are two ways for a program to access the system console
using UNIX-compatible i/o functions. One is to issue read and
write calls to the "logical devices" stdin, stdout, and/or
stderr. These three devices are opened by the Aztec system before
a user's program gains control. Thus the user's program can
access these devices without performing an initial "open"
function on them, and without performing a "close" function on
them before terminating. The default condition is for these
"logical devices" to all be the system console. However, the
operator, when activating the user's program, can specify that
the stdin or stdout logical device be associated with another
device or a disk file; that is, that the stdin and stdout i/o be
"redirected". Thus, if the user's program must communicate with
the operator, and can't be assured that the stdin and/or stdout
i/o has been redirected, then the program must use the other
method of communicating with the console, which is described in
this section. For more information on using the UNIx-compatible
i/o functions to communicate with the stdin, stdout, and stderr
devices, see the appropriate section which follows.

The other method for a program to acce'ss the system console is to
explicitly open the console, issue read and write function calls
to it, and then close it. The open and close calls were described
above, so the rest of this" section just covers the details of
reading and writing to the console.

Conso1e input

To read characters from the system console, a program issues read
function calls, passing as parameters the file descriptor which
was returned to the program when it opened the console, the
address of a character buffer into which characters from the
console are to be placed, and a number which specifies the
maximum number of characters to be returned to the program. The
read function will place characters in the buffer, as described
below, and return as its value an integer specifying the number
of characters placed in the buffer.

The system maintains an internal 256-character buffer into which
it reads console keyboard input. The read function returns
characters ~o the calling program from this buffer. If the
internal buffer is empty when a program requests console input,
the read function will perform its own read operation to the
console, putting the characters obtained in its internal buffer.
While the read function's read operation is in progress, the
console operator can use the normal CP/M editing characters, such
as rub out, backspace, etc. These editing characters do not
appear" in the internal read buffer. The read function's read
operation terminates when the operator depresses the carriag~
return key, the line feed key, or ctl-z, or when there are 256
characters in the internal buffer. Following the characters in
the internal buffer which were input by the user, the read
function places a carriage return, line feed sequence.

Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.    PAGE XVII.2
Aztec C I I                               Unbuffered I/O



The read function returns characters to the calling program from
the internal buffer. If there are characters in the buffer which
haven't yet been passed to the caller, the read function
transfers some to the caller's buffer, with the number transfered
being either the number requested by the caller, or the number
remaining in the internal buffer from the last actual console
read operation which haven't been passed to the caller. If the
internal buffer is empty when the caller makes a request of the
read function, the read function performs an actual console read
operation to refill the internal buffer, as described above, and
then transfers characters from it to the caller's buffer.

The read function returns to the caller as its value the number
of characters placed in the caller's buffer, or zero, if the
operator typed ctl-z in response to a console read operation by
the read function, or -1 if an error occurred. If an error
occurred, the read function also places a code in the global
integer errno which defines the error. If no error occurred, read
returns without modifying errno. The only symbolic value which
read may place in errno is EBADF, in response to an invalid file
descriptor from the caller. The integer value of EBADF is defined
in the file errno.h, which may be included in the user's program.


writing to the system conso1e, the line printer, or the punch


To send characters to the system console, the line printer, or
the punch device, a program calls the function "wri te", passing
i t as parameters the file descriptor which was passed to i t by
the function "open" when i t opened the device, the address of a
buffer containing characters to be sent, and an integer
specifying the number of characters to be sent. The write
function sends the characters directly to the device and returns
as its value the number of characters sent. If the write function
encounters a carriage return character in the caller's buffer, it
sends i t to the device, then sends a line feed character, then
continues with the next character in the caller's buffer.

If the write function detects an error, i t returns -1 as its
value and places an error code in the global integer errno. If an
error was no·t detected, errno is not modified. The only symbolic
value which write may place in errno is EBADF, signifying that an
invalid file descriptor was passed to write. The file errno.h
defines the integer value of EBADF.



Reading from the Ilreader- device

A program gets characters from the "reader" device by calling the
"read" function, passing i t as parameters the file descriptor
whiqh. was passed to it by open when it opened the reader device,
the address of a buffer into which characters from the device are


Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   PAGE XVII.3
Aztec C II                                  Unbuffered I/O


to be placed, and an integer specifying the number of character
to be read.

The read function reads characters directly into the caller 1 s
buffer. The operation continues until "read" reads the number of
characters specified by the caller. It, then returns as'its value
the number of characters read.

If read detects an error, i t returns as its value -1, and sets a
code in the global integer errno.h. If no error was detected,
errno.h is not modified. The only symholic value which read may
set in errno is EBADFi this means that an invalid file descriptor
was passed to read. The file errno.h, which can be included in
the user's program, defines the integer value of EBADF.


UNIX-compatib1e I/O to the stdin, stdout, and stderr devices

As was mentioned in the section on console i/o, when a user's
program is activated, three "logical devices ll are always openi
these are called "stdin", IIstdout ll , and IIstderr ll • By default,
these are associated with the system consolei however, the
operator can specify, when activating the program, that read
operations directed to stdin and write operations directed to
stdout be redirected to an operator-specified device or disk
file. The user's program needn't be aware of the actual device
associated with stdin, stdo"ut, or stderri i t simply issues read
and write function calls as it would to the system console.

If the user's program is to communic~te with stdin and stdout
where the possibility exists that either or both of them are a
device, such as the console, then the user's program should
restrict itself to just issuing read and write function calls to
these logical devices. However, if the operator always redirects
the stdin or stdout i/o to a disk file, then the program can
access the redirected device as it would a normal disk file. That
is, i t can reposition the IIcurrent position" of the logical
device using the IIposit" and/or "lseek" function calls. These
calls are described below, in the section on file i/o.

When accessing any device or file, including stdin, stdout, or
stderr, the user l s program must include a "file descriptor" with
the function call parameters which identifies the device with
which the user's program wants to tommunicate. In the case of
devices and files other than stdin, stdout, and stderr, the file
descriptor is that which the open function returned to the user's
program when i t opened the device or file. Since the user's
program doesn't itself open the stdin, stdout, and stderr logical
devices, there has to be another way for i t to determine the file
descriptors to use when commincating with these devices. The way
is this: to communicate with stdin, use a file descriptor having
value Oi for stdout, use Ii and for stderr, use 2.




Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.      PAGE XVII.4
Aztec C II                                Unbuffered I/O




File I/O

When communicating with disk files, in addition to the open and
close function calls, which were described above, and the read,
write, posit, and lseek function calls, which are described
below, there are three other function calls which can be made:
creat, to create a non-existant file, or to truncate an existing
file so that it doesn't contain anything; unlink, to erase a disk
file; and rename, to rename a disk file. These function are
described in chapter VI.

Programs call the functions read and write to transmit characters
between the program and a disk file. The transfer begins at the
"current position" of the file and proceeds .until the number of
characters specified by the calling program have been transfered.

The current position of a file can be manipulated in various ways
by a program, allowing the program to access the file both
sequentially and randomly. To read a file sequentially from the
beginning of the file, the program simply issues rep~ated read
requests. After each read operation, the current position of the
file is set to the character following the last one returned to
the calling program. Similarly, to write a file sequentially from
the beginning of the file, the program issues repeated write
requests. After each write operation, the current position of the
file is set to the character following the last one written.

Two additional functions, "lseek" and "posit", are provided to
allow programs to access files randomly. lseek sets the current
position of a file to a specified character location. posit sets
the current position to a specified record. The program can then
issue read and/or write requests to transfer data beginning at
the new current position. If UNIX compatibility is a requirement,
don't use the function "posit" - it's not supported by UNIX.

To perform a sequential update of a file, a program would
repeatedly perform the following sequence: read in a buffer's
worth of data: update the buffer: reset the current position in
the file to the location before the ·read operation: and finally,
write the buffer back to the file. The sequence for updating a
file randomly would be the same, except that the program would
explicitly set the current position of the file before each read
operation.




Copyright 1982 (C) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.   PAGE XVII.5
Aztec C II                                User Submitted Software



User Submitted Software

Some user submitted software is distributed with this system. The
convention for naming the file extension for user submitted
software is as follows:

              .ual -   assembler source   for a library routine
              .ucl -   "e" source for a   library routine
              .uau -   assembler source   for a utility routine
              .ucu -   "e" source for a   utility routine

Included in the user routines are an alloc and free function plus
an in port and out port function.

Anyone wishing to share software is welcome         to   do   so.   Each
routine should have:

  - a copyright notice
  - a statement granting the free use of the software
  - documentation describing the function and use of the software




Copyright 1982 (c) by Manx Software Systems, Inc.        PAGE XVIII.I
